अंशु
<u>'''Aṃśu.'''</u>--I. Name of a protégé of the Aśvins in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1> viii. 5, 26. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 160;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 89;<br> Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 129, suggests that he may be identical with '''[[खेल|Khela]].'''</ref> 2. '''[[धानंजय्य|Dhānaṃjayya]],''' pupil of '''Amāvāsya [[शाण्डिल्यायन|Śāṇḍilyāyana]],''' according to the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373.</ref>

अंहसस्-पति
<u>'''Aṃhasas-pati.'''</u>--This is the name of the intercalary month in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā (vii. 30; xxii. 31). See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अक्र
<u>'''Akra.'''</u>--In several passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_3> i. 143, 7;<br> 189, 7;<br> iii. 1, 12;<br> iv. 6, 3;<br> x. 77, 2.</ref> this word means, according to Geldner,<ref name=fx2_ve1_3> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 168, 169.</ref> ‘horse.’ Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_3> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 118. ''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 414.</ref> suggests that ‘riding horse’ is the precise sense. ''Cf.'' '''[[अश्व|Aśva]].'''

अक्ष
<u>'''1. Akṣa,'''</u> ‘axle,’ is a part of a chariot often referred to in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_4> i. 30, 14;<br> 166, 9;<br> iii. 53, 17;<br> vi. 24, 3;<br> x. 89;<br> 4, etc.</ref> and later. It was apparently<ref name=fx2_ve1_4> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 246.</ref> fastened to the body of the chariot ('''[[कोश|Kośa]]''') by straps (''akṣā-nah,'' lit. ‘tied to the axle,’ though this word is also<ref name=fx3_ve1_4> Rv. x. 53, 7. ''Cf.'' Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> rendered ‘horse’). The heating of the axle and the danger of its breaking were known.<ref name=fx4_ve1_4> Rv. i. 164, 13.</ref> The part of the axle round which the nave of the wheel revolved was called [[आणि|Āṇi]], ‘pin.’ 

अक्ष
<u>'''2. Akṣa.'''</u>--This word occurs frequently, from the Rigveda onwards, both in the singular and plural, meaning ‘die’ and ‘dice.’ Dicing, along with horse-racing, was one of the main amusements of the Vedic Indian; but, despite the frequent mention of the game in the literature, there is considerable difficulty in obtaining any clear picture of the mode in which it was played.<br><br>(1) ''The Material.''--The dice appear normally to have been made of Vibhīdaka nuts. Such dice are alluded to in both the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_5> vii. 86, 6;<br> x. 34, 1.</ref> and the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_5> Av. Paipp. xx. 4, 6.</ref> hence being called ‘brown’ (''[[बभ्रु|babhru]]''), and ‘born on a windy spot.’<ref name=fx3_ve1_5> Rv. x. 34, 5;<br> Av. vii. 114, 7;<br> Rv. x. 34, 1.</ref> In the ritual game of dice at the Agnyādheya and the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]] ceremonies the material of the dice is not specified, but it is possible that occasionally gold imitations of Vibhīdaka nuts were used.<ref name=fx4_ve1_5> Sāyaṇa on [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 6, 12;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 4, 6.</ref> There is no clear trace in the Vedic literature of the later use of cowries as dice.<ref name=fx5_ve1_5> Sāyaṇa, ''loc. cit.,'' and on Rv. i. 41, 9;<br> Mahīdhara on Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 28.</ref><br><br>(2) ''The Number.''--In the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve1_5> x. 34, 12.</ref> the dicer is described as ‘leader of a great horde’ (''senānīr mahato gaṇasya''), and in another passage<ref name=fx7_ve1_5> x. 34, 8.</ref> the number is given as ''tri-pañcāśaḥ,'' an expression which has been variously interpreted. Ludwig,<ref name=fx8_ve1_5> See his translation.</ref> Weber,<ref name=fx9_ve1_5> ''Über das Rājāsūya,'' 72.</ref> and Zimmer<ref name=fx10_ve1_5> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 284.</ref> render it as fifteen, which is grammatically hardly possible. Roth<ref name=fx11_ve1_5> Following Sāyaṇa on Rv. x. 34, 8.</ref> and Grassmann<ref name=fx12_ve1_5> In his translation.</ref> render it as ‘consisting of fifty-three.’ Lüders<ref name=fx13_ve1_5> ''Das Würfelspiel im alten Indien,'' 25.</ref> takes it as ‘consisting of one hundred and fifty,’ but he points out that this may be merely a vague expression for a large number. For a small number Zimmer<ref name=fx14_ve1_5> ''Op. cit.,'' 283.</ref> cites a reference in the Rigveda<ref name=fx15_ve1_5> i. 41, 9.</ref> to one who fears ‘him who holds four’ (''caturaś cid dadamānāt''), but the sense of that passage is dependent on the view taken of the method of playing the game.<br><br>(3) ''The Method of Play.''--In several passages of the later  Saṃhitās and Brāhmaṇas lists are given of expressions connected with dicing. The names are [[कृत|Kṛta]], Tretā, [[द्वापर|Dvāpara]], Āskanda, and Abhibhū in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx16_ve1_5> iv. 3, 3, 1. 2.</ref> In the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx17_ve1_5> xxx. 18.</ref> among the victims at the Puruṣamedha, the ''[[कितव|kitava]]'' is offered to the Akṣarāja, the ''ādinava-[[दर्श|darśa]]'' to the [[कृत|Kṛta]], the ''kalpin'' to the Tretā, the ''adhi-kalpin'' to the [[द्वापर|Dvāpara]], the ''[[सभा-स्थाणु|sabhā-sthāṇu]]'' to the Āskanda. The lists in the parallel version of the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] are ''[[कितव|kitava]], [[सभाविन्|sabhāvin]], ādinavadarśa, bahiḥ-sad,'' and ''[[सभा-स्थाणु|sabhā-sthāṇu]],''<ref name=fx18_ve1_5> iii. 4, 1, 16. These must be persons conversant with dicing, but the exact sense of the names is unknown.</ref> and Aksarāja, [[कृत|Kṛta]], Tretā, [[द्वापर|Dvāpara]], and Kali. From the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx19_ve1_5> v. 4, 4, 6.</ref> it appears that another name of Kali was Abhibhū, and the parallel lists in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] and Vājasaneyi Saṃhitās suggest that Abhibhū and Akṣarāja are identical, though both appear in the late [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] list. The names of some of these throws go back even to the Rigveda and the Atharvaveda. Kali occurs in the latter,<ref name=fx20_ve1_5> vii. 114, 1.</ref> and Lüders<ref name=fx21_ve1_5> ''Op. cit.,'' 43 ''et seq,''</ref> shows that in a considerable number of passages in the former [[कृत|Kṛta]] means a ‘throw’ (not ‘a stake’<ref name=fx22_ve1_5> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> or ‘what is won’<ref name=fx23_ve1_5> Grassmann's Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> and this sense is clearly found in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx24_ve1_5> vii. 52. See Rv. x. 42, 9 (''kṛtaṃ vicinoti'');<br> 43, 5;<br> x. 102, 2;<br> v. 60, 1;<br> ix. 97, 58;<br> i. 132, 1;<br> x. 34, 6;<br> i. 100, 9;<br> viii. 19, 10.</ref> Moreover, that there were more throws (''ayāḥ'') than one is proved by a passage in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx25_ve1_5> x. 116, 9.</ref> when the gods are compared to throws as giving or destroying wealth.<br><br>The nature of the throws is obscure. The St. Petersburg Dictionary conjectures that the names given above were applied either to dice marked 4, 3, 2, or 1, or to the sides of the dice so marked, and the latter interpretation is supported by some late commentators.<ref name=fx26_ve1_5> Ānandagiri on Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1, 4;<br> Nīlakaṇṭha on Mahābhārata, iv. 50, 24.</ref> But there is no evidence for the former interpretation, and, as regards the latter, the shape of the Vibhīdaka nuts,<ref name=fx27_ve1_5> Lüders, ''op. cit.,'' 18.</ref> used as dice, forbids any side being properly on the top. Light is thrown on the expressions by the descrip-  tion of a ritual game<ref name=fx28_ve1_5> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 8;<br> 9;<br> Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], v, 19, 4;<br> 20, 1, with Rudradatta's note, for the Agnyādheya. Āpastamba, xviii. 18, 16 ''st seq.,'' describes the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]] game, and ''cf.'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 4, 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 10, 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 4, 6;<br> Kātyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 7, 5 ''et seq.'' For [[कृत|Kṛta]] as four, see Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 2, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 11, 1.</ref> at the Agnyādheya and at the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]] ceremonies. The details are not certain,<ref name=fx29_ve1_5> See Caland, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 62, 123 ''et seq.''</ref> but it is clear that the game consisted in securing even numbers of dice, usually a number divisible by four, the [[कृत|Kṛta]], the other three throws then being the Tretā, when three remained over after division by four; the [[द्वापर|Dvāpara]], when two was the remainder; and the Kali, when one remained. If five were the dividing number, then the throw which showed no remainder was Kali, the [[कृत|Kṛta]] was that when four was left, and so on. The dice had no numerals marked on them, the only question being what was the total number of the dice themselves.<br><br>There is no reason to doubt that the game as played in the Rigveda was based on the same principle, though the details must remain doubtful. The number of dice used was certainly large,<ref name=fx30_ve1_5> Rv. x. 34, 8.</ref> and the reference to throwing fours,<ref name=fx31_ve1_5> Rv. i. 41, 9. In x. 34, 2, the loss is ascribed to ''akṣasya ekaparasya,'' which confirms the explanation of [[द्वापर|Dvāpara]] given in Pāṇiṇi, ii. 1, 10.</ref> and losing by one, points to the use of the [[कृत|Kṛta]] as the winning throw. The Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx32_ve1_5> vii. 114, 1.</ref> on the other hand, possibly knew of the Kali as the winning throw. In one respect the ordinary game must have differed from the ritual game. In the latter the players merely pick out the number of dice required--no doubt to avoid ominous errors, such as must have happened if a real game had been played. In the secular game the dice were thrown,<ref name=fx33_ve1_5> Rv. x. 34, 1. 8. 9;<br> Av. iv. 38, 3.</ref> perhaps on the principle suggested by Lüders:<ref name=fx34_ve1_5> ''Op. cit.'' 56.</ref> the one throwing a certain number on the place of playing, and the other then throwing a number to make up with those already thrown a multiple of four or five. This theory, at any rate, accounts for the later stress laid on the power of computation in a player, as in the Nala.<br><br>No board appears to have been used, but a depression on which  the dice were thrown (''[[अधि-देवन|adhi-devana]], [[देवन|devana]],''<ref name=fx35_ve1_5> ''[[अधिदेवन|Adhidevana]]'' in Av. v. 31, 6;<br> vi. 70, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā;<br> i. 6, 11;<br> iv. 4, 6, etc.;<br> ''[[देवन|devana]]'' in Rv. x. 43, 5. The falling of the dice on the ground is referred to in Av. vii. 114, 2.</ref> ''[[इरिण|iriṇa]]''<ref name=fx36_ve1_5> Rv. x. 34, 1.</ref> ), was made in the ground. No dice box was used, but reference is made to a case for keeping dice in (''[[अक्ष|akṣa]]-[[वपन|vapana]]''<ref name=fx37_ve1_5> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 1, 11.</ref> The throw was called ''[[ग्रह|graha]]''<ref name=fx38_ve1_5> Av. iv. 38, 1 ''et seq.;<br> cf.'' vii. 114, 5.</ref> or earlier ''[[ग्राभ|grābha]].''<ref name=fx39_ve1_5> Rv. viii. 81, 1;<br> ix. 106, 3.</ref> The stake is called ''vij.''<ref name=fx40_ve1_5> Rv. i. 92, 10;<br> ii. 12, 5;<br> ''[[लक्ष|lakṣa]]'' in ii. 12, 4, and often ''[[धन|dhana]].'' So Lüders, ''op. cit.,'' 10, n. 5;<br> 62, n. 1. Roth and Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 286, render ‘he makes the dice secretly disappear’ (i. 92, 10).</ref> Serious losses could be made at dicing: in the Rigveda a dicer laments the loss of all his property, including his wife.<ref name=fx41_ve1_5> Rv. x. 34, 2. For cheating at play ''cf.'' Rv. v, 85, 8;<br> vii. 86, 6;<br> 104 14;<br> Av. vi. 118.</ref> Lüders<ref name=fx42_ve1_5> ''Op. cit.,'' 61.</ref> finds a different form of the game referred to in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx43_ve1_5> iv. 1, 4;<br> 6. According to Nīlakaṇṭha on Harivaṃśa, ii. 61, 39, the stake was divided into ten parts, and the Kali then took one, the [[द्वापर|Dvāpara]] three, the Tretā six, and the [[कृत|Kṛta]] all ten. This explanation seems harsh.<br><br>''Cf.'' Roth, Gurupūjākaumudī, 1-4;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 283-287;<br> Lüders, ''Das Würfelspiel im alten Indien;<br>'' Caland, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 62, 123 ''et seq.;<br>'' Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 823 ''et seq.''</ref>

अक्ष
<u>'''3. Akṣa.'''</u>--In the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vii. 3, 1) this word seems to denote the nut of the Vibhīdaka (''Terminalia bellerica'').<br>==Foot Notes==

अक्षत
<u>'''Akṣata'''</u> or '''Akṣita.'''--In one passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_7> vii. 76, 4.</ref> dealing with the '''[[जायान्य|Jāyānya]],''' mention is made of a remedy for sores designated both Akṣita and Sukṣata, or, according to the reading of the Kauṣika [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], [[अक्षत|Akṣata]] and Sukṣata, while Sāyaṇa has Akṣita and Sukṣita. Bloomfield<ref name=fx2_ve1_7> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 17, 562.</ref> renders ‘not caused by cutting’ and ‘caused by cutting.’ Formerly<ref name=fx3_ve1_7> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, cxvii. ''et seq.''</ref> he suggested ‘tumour’ or ‘boil.’ Whitney<ref name=fx4_ve1_7> Translation of the Atharvaveda 442.</ref> thinks that two varieties of [[जायान्य|Jāyānya]] are meant. Ludwig<ref name=fx5_ve1_7> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 500.</ref> reads with Sāyana ''akṣita,'' which he renders by ‘not firmly established’ in the invalid. Zimmer<ref name=fx6_ve1_7> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 377.</ref> finds in it a disease [[क्षत|Kṣata]]. 

अक्षा-वपन
<u>'''Akṣā-vapana.'''</u> See '''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अक्षु
<u>'''Akṣu.'''</u>--The word occurs in two passages of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_9> viii. 8, 18 (''akṣujālābhyām'');<br> ix. 3, 18.</ref> and one of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_9> i. 180, 5.</ref> Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_9> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> renders it by ‘net,’ while Bo7htlingk<ref name=fx4_ve1_9> Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> suggests ‘axle of a car.’ Geldner<ref name=fx5_ve1_9> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 136.</ref> sees in it a stake or pole used with a fishermen's net ('''[[जाल|Jāla]]'''),<ref name=fx6_ve1_9> Av. viii. 8, 18.</ref> the pole of a wagon,<ref name=fx7_ve1_9> Av. i. 180, 5.</ref> and the pole of a house, whether vertical or horizontal, he leaves uncertain (see '''[[वंश|Vaṃśa]]''').<ref name=fx8_ve1_9> ix. 3, 18.</ref> Bloomfield<ref name=fx9_ve1_9> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 598.</ref> takes it as a covering of wickerwork stretched across a beam and sloping down to both sides--like a thatched roof, and this best explains the epithet ‘thousand-eyed’ (''i.e.,'' with countless holes) ascribed to it. In the other Atharvaveda passage<ref name=fx10_ve1_9> Av. viii. 8, 18.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 153, 265;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 506, 526;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 179.</ref> he accepts the sense ‘net,’ and doubts if the word in the Rigveda is not an adjective (''a-kṣu'') as it is taken by Sāyaṇa. See also '''[[गृह|Gṛha]].'''

अगस्ति
<u>'''Agasti.'''</u>--This form of '''Agastya's''' name occurs once in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_10> iv. 9, 3. ''Cf.'' '''Sieg,''' ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 127, n. 5.</ref> where he appears as a favourite of [[मित्र|Mitra]] and Varuṇa.

अगस्त्य
<u>'''Agastya.'''</u>--This is the name of a sage, of mythical character, who plays a great part in the later literature. He was a '''[[मान|Māna]],'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_11> Rv. vii. 33, 10 ([[अगस्त्य|Agastya]]), 13 ([[मान|Māna]]).</ref> and therefore is called '''[[मान्य|Mānya]]'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_11> Rv. i. 165, 15 = 166, 15 = 167, 11 = 168, 10;<br> 165, 14;<br> 177, 5;<br> 184, 4 ([[मान्य|Mānya]]);<br> i. 189, 8;<br> 117, 11 (''Mānasya [[सूनु|sūnu]]'').</ref> and son of [[मान|Māna]], and only once is there a reference<ref name=fx3_ve1_11> Rv. vii. 33, 13. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 138 ''et seq.''</ref> to the legend prevalent in latter times that he was a son of [[मित्र|Mitra]] and Varuṇa.<br><br>His greatest feat was the reconciliation of Indra and the Maruts after Indra had been annoyed at his proposing to give the Maruts an offering to the exclusion of Indra. This feat is the subject of three hymns of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx4_ve1_11> Rv. i. 165;<br> 170;<br> 171.</ref> and is often referred  to in the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx5_ve1_11> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 5, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 11, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 8;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, x. 11;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxi. 14, 5;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 16;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxvi. 9.</ref> though the exact details and significance of the legend are variously treated by Oldenberg,<ref name=fx6_ve1_11> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 39, 60 ''et seq.''</ref> Sieg,<ref name=fx7_ve1_11> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 108-119.</ref> Hertel,<ref name=fx8_ve1_11> ''Vienna Oriental Journal,'' 18, 152-154.</ref> and von Schroeder.<ref name=fx9_ve1_11> ''Mysterium und Mimus im Rigveda,'' 91 ''et seq.''</ref><br><br>He also appears in a strange dialogue with [[लोपामुद्रा|Lopāmudrā]] in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx10_ve1_11> i. 179. ''Cf.'' Sieg, ''op. cit.,'' 120-126;<br> Oldenberg, ''op. cit.,'' 66-68.</ref> which appears to show him as an ascetic who finally yields to temptation. Von '''Schroeder'''<ref name=fx11_ve1_11> ''Op. cit.,'' 156-172.</ref> regards it as a ritual drama of vegetation magic.<br><br>In another passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx12_ve1_11> i. 117, 11;<br> ''cf.'' i. 116, 15.</ref> he appears as helping in the Aśvins’ gift of a leg to [[विश्पला|Viśpalā]]. Sāyaṇa holds that be was the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of '''[[खेल|Khela]],''' and Sieg<ref name=fx13_ve1_11> ''Op. cit.,'' 128.</ref> accepts this view, while Pischel<ref name=fx14_ve1_11> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 171-173.</ref> thinks that [[खेल|Khela]] is a deity, Vivasvant.<br><br>Geldner<ref name=fx15_ve1_11> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 138, 143.</ref> shows from the Rigveda<ref name=fx16_ve1_11> Rv. vii. 33, 10. 13.</ref> that [[अगस्त्य|Agastya]], as brother of [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]]--both being miraculous sons of [[मित्र|Mitra]] and Varuṇa-introduces '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]]''' to the '''Tṛtsus.''' There are two other references to [[अगस्त्य|Agastya]] in the Rigveda, the one<ref name=fx17_ve1_11> vii. 5, 26. Sieg, 129, suggests that this refers to the [[खेल|Khela]] legend.</ref> including him in a long list of persons, the other alluding to his sister's sons (''nadbhyaḥ''),<ref name=fx18_ve1_11> x. 60, 6.</ref> apparently '''[[बन्धु|Bandhu]],''' etc. In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx19_ve1_11> ii. 32, 3;<br> iv. 37, 1. Perhaps for this reason the Rigveda Anukramaṇī ascribes to him (Rv. i. 191) a magic hymn.</ref> he appears as connected with witchcraft, and in a long list of sages.<ref name=fx20_ve1_11> xviii. 3, 15.</ref> In the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx21_ve1_11> iv. 2, 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 117;<br> Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 106-129;<br> Macdonell, ''Bṛhaddevatā,'' 2, 136 ''et seq.;<br>'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 221;<br> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 110.</ref> cows, with a peculiar mark on their ears (''viṣṭya-karṇyaḥ''), are associated with him.

अगर
<u>'''Agara.'''</u>--This rare word is found as ‘house’ in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_12> ii. 15. ''Cf. āgara,'' ‘chamber’ (?), n Av. iv. 36, 3;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 407. Agāra occurs also in Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 7, 21.</ref> 

अग्नि-दग्ध
<u>'''Agni-dagdha.'''</u>--This epithet (‘burnt with fire’)<ref name=fx1_ve1_13> Rv. x. 15, 14;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 1, 7;<br> ''dagdhāḥ,'' Av. xviii. 2, 34.</ref> applies to the dead who were burned on the funeral pyre. This is one of the two normal methods of disposing of the dead, the other being burial (''an-agnidagdhāḥ,'' ‘not burnt with fire’).<ref name=fx2_ve1_13> Rv., ''loc. cit.;<br>'' = ''nikhātāḥ,'' Av. xviii. 2, 34.</ref> The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_13> ''Loc. cit.''</ref> adds two further modes of disposal to those-viz., casting out (''paroptāḥ''), and the exposure of the dead (''uddhitāḥ''). The exact sense of these expressions is doubtful. Zimmer<ref name=fx4_ve1_13> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 402.</ref> considers that the former is a parallel to the Iranian practice of casting out the dead to be devoured by beasts, and that the latter refers to the old who are exposed when helpless.<ref name=fx5_ve1_13> Rv. viii. 51, 2.</ref> Whitney<ref name=fx6_ve1_13> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 841.</ref> refers the latter expression to the exposure of the dead body on a raised platform of some sort.<br><br>Burial was clearly not rare in the Rigvedic period: a whole hymn<ref name=fx7_ve1_13> x. 18. The interpretation of v. 8 is a famous crux, see [[पत्नी|Patnī]].</ref> describes the ritual attending it. The dead man was buried apparently in full attire, with his bow in his hand, and probably at one time his wife was immolated to accompany him, in accordance with a practice common among savage tribes. But in the Vedic period both customs appear in a modified form: the son takes the bow from the hand of the dead man, and the widow is led away from her dead husband by his brother or other nearest kinsman. A stone is set between the dead and the living to separate them. In the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx8_ve1_13> xviii. 2, 25;<br> 3, 70.</ref> but not in the Rigveda, a coffin (''[[वृक्ष|vṛkṣa]]'') is alluded to. In both Saṃhitās<ref name=fx9_ve1_13> Rv. vii. 89, 1;<br> Av. v. 30, 14;<br> xviii. 2, 52.</ref> occur other allusions to the ‘house of earth’ (''[[भूमि|bhūmi]]-[[गृह|gṛha]]''). To remove the apparent discrepancy between burning and burial, by assuming that the references to burial are to the burial of the burned bones, as does Oldenberg,<ref name=fx10_ve1_13> ''Religion des Veda,'' 571.</ref> is unnecessary and improbable, as burning and burial subsisted side by side in Greece for many years.<br><br>Burning was, however, equally usual, and it grew steadily in frequency, for in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx11_ve1_13> viii. 8. 5.</ref> the adornment  of the body of the dead with curd ('''[[आमिक्षा|Āmikṣā]]'''), clothes, and ornaments, in order to win the next world, is referred to as something erroneous and wrong, and in the funeral Mantras of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx12_ve1_13> xxxv. ''Cf.'' also [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 80 ''et seq.,'' which treats the Atharvaveda hymns, xviii. 1-3, as intended for burning only.</ref> only burning seems to be contemplated; the verses which refer to burial here really alluding to the burial of the ashes in the burying-ground (''[[श्मशान|śmaśāna]]'').<ref name=fx13_ve1_13> Av. v. 31, 8;<br> x. 1, 18;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 8, 5;<br> 4, 11, 3.</ref> The body was wrapped in fat,<ref name=fx14_ve1_13> Rv. x. 16, 7.</ref> as we learn from the funeral hymn in the Rigveda, a goat being apparently burned with it,<ref name=fx15_ve1_13> Rv. x. 16, 4. But ''aja'' may mean ‘the unborn part,’ as Weber prefers to take it, Proceedings of the Berlin Academy, 1895, 847.</ref> to act as a guide on the way to the next world. According to the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx16_ve1_13> xii. 2, 48.</ref> a draft-ox was burned presumably for the dead to ride with in the next world. It was expected that the dead would revive with his whole body and all his limbs (''sarva-tanūḥ sāṅgaḥ''),<ref name=fx17_ve1_13> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 6, 1, 1;<br> xi. 1, 8, 6;<br> xii. 8, 3, 31. ''Cf.'' Av. xi. 3, 32. This fact probably explains the use of ''śeṣaḥ'' in Rv. x. 16, 5. The dead enjoy sexual pleasures in the next world;<br> see Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 307, n. 462.</ref> although it is also said<ref name=fx18_ve1_13> Rv. x. 16, 3.</ref> that the eye goes to the sun, the breath to the wind, and so forth.<br><br>Before burial or burning, the corpse was washed,<ref name=fx19_ve1_13> Av. v. 19, 14.</ref> a clog (''[[कूदी|kūdī]]'') being tied to the foot to prevent the deceased returning to earth.<ref name=fx20_ve1_13> Av. v. 19, 12;<br> see Roth, ''Festgruss an Bo7htlingk,'' 98;<br> Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 12, 416.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 401407;<br> Roth, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 8, 468 ''et seq.;<br> Siebenzig Lieder,'' 150 ''et seq.;<br>'' Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 570 ''et seq.;<br>'' Caland, ''Die altindischen Todten- und Bestattungsgebräuche;<br>'' von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 40-42;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythology,'' 3, 413423;<br> ''Rituallitteratur,'' 87 ''et seq.;<br>'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' 165, 166;<br> Proceedings of the Berlin Academy, 1895, 815 ''et seq.''</ref>

अग्नि-भू काश्यप
<u>'''Agni-bhū Kāśyapa'''</u> is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_14> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 374.</ref>

अग्नि-शाल
<u>'''Agni-śāla.'''</u>--This term, which designates part of the sacrificial  apparatus,<ref name=fx1_ve1_15> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 18.</ref> is applied in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_15> ix. 3, 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns. of the Atharvaveda,'' 598;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 154.</ref> to a part of an ordinary house, presumably the central hall where the fireplace was.

अघा
<u>'''Aghā.'''</u>--In the wedding hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_16> x. 85, 13.</ref> it is said that cows are slain in the Aghās, and the wedding takes place at the '''Arjunīs''' (dual). The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_16> xiv. 1, 13.</ref> has the ordinary '''[[मघास्|Maghās]]''' instead. It is impossible to resist the conclusion that the reading of the Rigveda was deliberately altered because of the connection of the slaughter of kine with sin (''agha'')--possibly, too, with a further desire to emphasize the contrast with ''[[अघ्न्या|aghnyā]],'' a name for ‘cow.’ Moreover, in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_16> iii. 1, 4, 8.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 364;<br> Proceedings of the Berlin Academy, 1894, 804;<br> Jacobi, ''Festgruss an Roth,'' 69;<br> Winternitz, ''Das altindische Hochzeitsrituell,'' 32;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 742;<br> Thibaut, ''Indian Antiquary,'' 24, 95.</ref> occurs the formula ‘Svāhā to the [[मघास्|Maghās]], Svāhā to the Anaghās.’ See also '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''

अघाश्व
<u>'''Aghāśva.'''</u>--The name of a serpent in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_17> x. 4, 10. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 95.</ref>

अ-घ्न्या
<u>'''A-ghnyā.'''</u>--See '''[[मांस|Māṃsa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अङ्क
<u>'''Aṅka.'''</u>--The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_19> i. 7, 7, 2.</ref> and [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_19> ii. 7, 8, 1. ''Cf.'' [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 5.</ref> refer to two Aṅkas and two Nyaṅkas as parts of a chariot. The meaning of these terms is quite obscure. The commentators refer them to the sides or wheels. Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve1_19> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 251, 252.</ref> compares the Greek <ref name=fx4_ve1_19> ''Iliad,'' v. 728. ''Cf.'' Smith's ''Dictionary of Antiquities,'' 1, 578.</ref> and thinks that the Aṅkau were the upper border of the body of the chariot (''[[कोश|kośa]], [[वन्धुर|vandhura]]''), and the Nyaṅkau the lower rims for greater security. Oldenberg<ref name=fx5_ve1_19> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 29, 364, on Pāraskara [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 14, 6.</ref> confesses that the exact sense is impossible to make out, but considers that the terms at once refer to parts of the chariot and to divinities, while Bo7htlingk<ref name=fx6_ve1_19> Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> takes the term as referring to divinities alone. 

अङ्ग
<u>'''Aṅga.'''</u>--The name occurs only once in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_20> v. 22, 14.</ref> in connection with the '''Gandhāris, Mūjavants,''' and '''Magadhas,''' as distinct peoples. They appear also in the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_20> ii. 9.</ref> in the compound name ''[[अङ्ग|Aṅga]]-magadhāḥ.'' As in later times they were settled on the Sone and Ganges,<ref name=fx3_ve1_20> ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 35;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 446, 449;<br> Pargiter, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 852, inclines to regard them as a non-Aryan people that came over-sea to Eastern India. There is nothing in the Vedic literature to throw light on this hypothesis.</ref> their earlier seat was presumably there also. See also '''[[वङ्ग|Vaṅga]].'''

अङ्ग वैरोचन
<u>'''Aṅga Vairocana.'''</u>--He is included in the list of anointed kings in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_21> viii. 22. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 214.</ref> His [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] was '''Udamaya,''' an [[आत्रेय|Ātreya]].

अङ्गारावक्षयण
<u>'''Aṅgārāvakṣayaṇa.'''</u>--A word of doubtful meaning found in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_22> iii. 9, 18.</ref> It is rendered ‘tongs’ by Max Müller and Bo7htlingk in their translations. The St. Petersburg Dictionary explains it as ‘a vessel in which coals are extinguished,’ and Monier-Williams as ‘an instrument for extinguishing coals.’ The smaller St. Petersburg Dictionary renders the word ‘coal-shovel or tongs.’ ''Cf.'' '''Ulmukāvakṣayaṇa.'''

अङ्गिरस्
<u>'''Aṅgiras.'''</u>--The Aṅgirases appear in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_23> ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' ii. 156-169.</ref> as semimythical beings, and no really historical character can be assigned even to those passages<ref name=fx2_ve1_23> Rv. i. 45, 3;<br> 139, 9;<br> iii. 31, 7, etc.;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 2, 10.</ref> which recognize a father of the race, [[अङ्गिरस्|Aṅgiras]]. Later, however, there were definite families of Aṅgirases, to whose ritual practices (''ayana, dvirātra'') references are made.<ref name=fx3_ve1_23> Av. xviii. 4, 8, but this may be mythical;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xx. 11, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 4, 1. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' 142, 143.</ref>

अङ्गुष्ठ
<u>'''Aṅguṣṭha.'''</u>--As a measure of size this word appears in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iv. 12; vi. 17). <br>==Foot Notes==

अ-च्युत्
<u>'''A-cyut.'''</u>--He acted as [[प्रतिहर्तृ|Pratihartṛ]] at the Sattra celebrated by the Vibhindukīyas and described in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_25> iii. 233. See ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 38.</ref>

अज
<u>'''Aja, Ajā.'''</u>--This is the ordinary name for goat in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_26> ''Aja'' in Rv. x. 16, 4;<br> i. 162, 2. 4;<br> Av. ix. 5, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxi. 9, etc.;<br> ''ajā'' in Rv. viii. 70, 15;<br> Av. vi. 71, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii., 56, etc.</ref> and the later literature. The goat is also called '''[[बस्त|Basta]], [[छाग|Chāga]], Chagala.''' Goats and sheep (''ajāvayaḥ'') are very frequently mentioned together.<ref name=fx2_ve1_26> Rv. x. 90, 10;<br> Av. viii. 7, 25;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 43, etc.</ref> The female goat is spoken of as producing two or three kids,<ref name=fx3_ve1_26> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 10, 1.</ref> and goat's milk is well known.<ref name=fx4_ve1_26> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 6, 1;<br> v. 1, 7, 4. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 364, n. 4.</ref> The goat as representative of Pūṣan plays an important part in the ritual of burial.<ref name=fx5_ve1_26> Rv. x. 16, 4, etc. ''Cf.'' p. 9.</ref> The occupation of a goatherd (''ajapāla'') was a recognized one, being distinguished from that of a cowherd and of a shepherd.<ref name=fx6_ve1_26> Vājasaneyī Saṃhitā, xxx. 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 9, 1.</ref>

अज
<u>'''Aja.'''</u>--The Ajas are named in one verse of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_27> vii. 18. 19.</ref> as having been defeated by the '''Tṛtsus''' under '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]].''' They are there mentioned with the '''Yakṣus''' and '''Śigrus,''' and Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve1_27> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 127, ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 173.</ref> conjectures that they formed part of a confederacy under [[भेद|Bheda]] against [[सुदास्|Sudās]]. The name has been regarded as a sign of totemism,<ref name=fx3_ve1_27> ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' 153;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1907, 929;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, 200, 21;<br> Risley, ''Peoples of India,'' 83 ''et seq.''</ref> but this is very uncertain, and it is impossible to say if they were or were not Āryans.

अजकव
<u>'''Ajakava.'''</u>--This name of a poisonous scorpion occurs once in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_28> vii. 50, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 99.</ref>

अज-गर
<u>'''Aja-gara'''</u> (‘goat-swallower’) occurs in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_29> xi. 2, 25;<br> xx. 129, 17.</ref> and in the list of animals at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_29> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā 5, 14, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii, 14, 19;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 38.</ref> or horse sacrifice, as the  name of the boa-constrictor. Elsewhere<ref name=fx3_ve1_29> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 13, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 34.</ref> it is called [[वाहस|Vāhasa]]. It denotes a person at the snake feast in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_29> xxv. 15, in the form of Ajagāva, with which ''cf.'' '''Ajakāva.'''</ref>

अज-मीढ
<u>'''Aja-mīḍha.'''</u>--The Ājamīḍhas, or descendants of [[अजमीढ|Ajamīḍha]], are referred to in a hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_30> iv. 44, 6.</ref> Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_30> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 123, 135.</ref> and Oldenberg<ref name=fx3_ve1_30> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 215.</ref> deduce from the use of this patronymic that [[अजमीढ|Ajamīḍha]] was the seer of that hymn.

अज-शृङ्गी
<u>'''Aja-śṛṅgī.'''</u>--This plant (‘goat's horn’), equated by the commentator with [[विषाणिन्|Viṣāṇin]] (the ''Odina pinnata''), is celebrated as a demon-destroyer in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_31> iv. 37.</ref> Its other name is '''[[अराटकी|Arāṭakī]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_31> iv. 37, 6.</ref> Weber<ref name=fx3_ve1_31> ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 144. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 408, 409;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 68;<br> Caland, ''Altindisches Zauberritual,'' 89.</ref> suggests that it is the ''Prosopis spicigera'' or ''Mimosa suma.''

अजात-शत्रु
<u>'''Ajāta-śatru.'''</u>--He is mentioned as a King of Kāśī (Kāśya) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka<ref name=fx1_ve1_32> ii. 1, 1.</ref> and [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_32> iv. 1.</ref> Upaniṣads, where he instructs the proud [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] [[बालाकि|Bālāki]] as to the real nature of the self. He is not to be identified with the Ajātasattu of the Buddhist texts.<ref name=fx3_ve1_32> ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 213;<br> Hoernle, ''Osteology,'' 106;<br> Keith, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 62, 138.</ref>

अज्ञात-यक्ष्म
<u>'''Ajñāta-yakṣma,'''</u> the ‘unknown sickness,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_33> x. 161, 1 = Av. iii. 11, 1.</ref> Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_33> vi. 127, 3.</ref> and [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx3_ve1_33> xiii. 16.</ref> It is referred to in connection with [[राजयक्ष्म|Rājayakṣma]]. Grohmann<ref name=fx4_ve1_33> ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 400.</ref> thinks that the two are different forms of disease, hypertrophy and atrophy, the purpose of the spell in the Rigveda being thus the removal of all disease. From the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx5_ve1_33> vi. 127. 3.</ref> he deduces its identity with '''[[बलास|Balāsa]].''' Zimmer,<ref name=fx6_ve1_33> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 377, 378.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield. ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 342;<br> Atharvaveda, 60;<br> Jolly, ''Medicin'' (in Bühler's Encyclopædia), 89.</ref> however, points out that this  conclusion is unjustified, leaving the disease unidentified, which seems to accord with its name.

अजिन
<u>'''Ajina.'''</u>--This word denotes generally the skin of an animal-''e.g.,'' a gazelle,<ref name=fx1_ve1_34> Av. v. 21, 7.</ref> as well as that of a goat ('''Aja''').<ref name=fx2_ve1_34> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2, 1, 21. 24.</ref> The use of skins as clothing is shown by the adjective ‘clothed in skins’ (''[[अजिन|ajina]]-vāsin'') in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_34> iii. 9, 1, 12.</ref> and the furrier's trade is mentioned in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx4_ve1_34> xxx. 15 (''[[अजिन|ajina]]-saṃdha'');<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 13, 1 (''ajinasaṃdhāya'').</ref> The Maruts also wear deer-skins,<ref name=fx5_ve1_34> Rv. i. 166, 10.</ref> and the wild ascetics (''muni'') of a late Rigveda hymn<ref name=fx6_ve1_34> x. 136, 2. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 262.</ref> seem to be clad in skins ('''Mala''').

अजिर
<u>'''Ajira.'''</u>--He was [[सुब्रह्मण्य|Subrahmaṇya]] priest at the snake festival of the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_35> xxv. 15. See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 35.</ref>

अजीगर्त सौयवस
<u>'''Ajīgarta Sauyavasa.'''</u>--This is the name given to the father of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]]''' in the famous legend of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_36> vii. 15;<br> 17. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 19.</ref> perhaps invented for the occasion, as Weber<ref name=fx2_ve1_36> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 460;<br> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> suggests.

अ-ज्येयता
<u>'''A-jyeyatā.'''</u> See '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अणीचिन् मौन
<u>'''Aṇīcin Mauna.'''</u>--He is mentioned as an authority on ritual, and contemporary with '''[[जाबाल|Jābāla]]''' and '''[[चित्र|Citra]] [[गौश्रायणि|Gauśrāyaṇi]]''' or '''[[गौश्र|Gauśra]],''' in the '''[[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]]''' [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_38> xxiii. 5.</ref>

अणु
<u>'''Aṇu.'''</u>--This is the designation in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_39> xviii. 12.</ref> and the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_39> vi. 3, 15 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]]), where see Dviveda's note.</ref> of a cultivated grain, '''apparently''' the ''Panicum miliaceum.''

अतिथि
<u>'''Atithi'''</u> (‘guest’).--A hymn of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_40> ix. 6.</ref> celebrates in detail the merits of hospitality. The guest should be fed before  the host eats, water should be offered to him, and so forth. The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_40> i. 11, 2.</ref> also lays stress on hospitality, using the expression ‘one whose deity is his guest’ (''[[अतिथि|atithi]]-deva''). In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx3_ve1_40> i. 1, 1.</ref> it is said that only the good are deemed worthy of receiving hospitality. The guest-offering forms a regular part of the ritual,<ref name=fx4_ve1_40> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 3, 2, 1.</ref> and cows were regularly slain in honour of guests.<ref name=fx5_ve1_40> ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 17, 426;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Rituallitteratur,'' 79.</ref>

अतिथि-ग्व
<u>'''Atithi-gva.'''</u>--This name occurs frequently in the Rigveda, apparently applying, in nearly all cases, to the same king, otherwise called '''Divodāsa.''' The identity of the two persons has been denied by Bergaigne,<ref name=fx1_ve1_41> ''Religion Védique,'' 2, 342 ''et seq.''</ref> but is certainly proved by a number of passages, when the two names occur together,<ref name=fx2_ve1_41> Rv. i. 51, 6;<br> 112, 14;<br> 130, 7;<br> iv. 26, 3;<br> vi. 47, 22.</ref> in connection with the defeat of '''[[शम्बर|Śambara]].''' In other passages<ref name=fx3_ve1_41> Rv. i. 53, 8;<br> x. 48, 8.</ref> [[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]] is said to have assisted Indra in slaying [[पर्णय|Parṇaya]] and [[करञ्ज|Karañja]]. Sometimes he is only vaguely referred to, while once<ref name=fx5_ve1_41> Rv. vii. 19, 8. There is no ground for assuming the reference here to be to a later [[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]].</ref> he is mentioned as an enemy of [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] and Yadu. Again<ref name=fx6_ve1_41> Rv. i. 53, 10;<br> ii. 14, 7;<br> vi. 18, 13;<br> viii. 53, 2.</ref> [[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]] is coupled with '''[[आयु|Āyu]]''' and '''[[कुत्स|Kutsa]]''' as defeated by '''[[तूर्वयाण|Tūrvayāṇa]].'''<br><br>A different [[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]] appears to be referred to in a Dānastuti<ref name=fx7_ve1_41> Rv. viii. 68, 16. 17.</ref> (‘Praise of Gifts’), where his son, '''[[इन्द्रोत|Indrota]],''' is mentioned.<br><br>Roth<ref name=fx8_ve1_41> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 123;<br> Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 17, 426, who renders the name ‘presenting cows to guests.’</ref> distinguishes three Atithigvas--the [[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]] Divodāsa, the enemy of [[पर्णय|Parṇaya]] and [[करञ्ज|Karañja]], and the enemy of [[तूर्वयाण|Tūrvayāṇa]]. But the various passages can be reconciled, especially if it is admitted that [[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]] Divodāsa was already an ancient hero in the earliest hymns, and was becoming almost mythical.<br><br><ref name=fx4_ve1_41> Rv. vi. 26, 3.</ref>

अति-धन्वन् शौनक
<u>'''Ati-[[धन्वन्|dhanvan]] Śaunaka.'''</u>--He is mentioned as a teacher in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_42> i. 9, 3.</ref> and the Vaṃsa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_42> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 384.</ref> 

अ-तृणाद
<u>'''A-tṛṇāda.'''</u>--This term (‘not eating grass’) was applied, according to the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], to a newborn calf.<ref name=fx1_ve1_43> i. 5, 2. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 268.</ref>

अत्क
<u>'''1. Atka.'''</u>--This word occurs frequently in the Rigveda, but its sense is doubtful. Roth, Grassmann, Ludwig, Zimmer,<ref name=fx1_ve1_44> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 262.</ref> and others render it as ‘garment’ in several passages,<ref name=fx2_ve1_44> i. 95, 7;<br> ii. 35, 14;<br> iv. 18, 5;<br> v. 55, 6;<br> 74, 5;<br> vi. 29, 3;<br> viii. 41, 7;<br> ix. 101, 14;<br> 107, 13;<br> [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]], ii. 1193.</ref> when the expressions ‘put on’ (''vyā'' or ''prati muñc'') or ‘put off’ (''muñc'') are used of it, and when it is said to be ‘woven’ (''vyuta'')<ref name=fx3_ve1_44> Rv. i. 122, 2.</ref> or ‘wellfitting’ (''surabhi'').<ref name=fx4_ve1_44> Rv. vi. 29, 3;<br> x. 123, 7.</ref> On the other hand, Pischel<ref name=fx5_ve1_44> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 193-204.</ref> denies that this sense occurs, and otherwise explains the passages. He takes the term to mean ‘axe’ in four places.<ref name=fx6_ve1_44> Rv. v. 55, 6;<br> vi. 33, 3;<br> x. 49, 3;<br> 99, 9. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 94, n. 1.</ref>

अत्क
<u>'''2. Atka.'''</u>--In two passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_45> x. 49, 3;<br> 99, 9.</ref> this word is regarded as a proper name by Roth, Grassmann, and Ludwig. But Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve1_45> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 262, 297.</ref> explains it in these passages as the ‘armour of a warrior as a whole,’ and Pischel<ref name=fx3_ve1_45> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 195.</ref> thinks that in both cases an ‘axe’ is meant.

अत्य्-अंहस् आरुणि
<u>'''Aty-aṃhas Āruṇi.'''</u>--According to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 10, 9, 3-5), this teacher sent a pupil to question '''[[प्लक्ष|Plakṣa]] Dayyāṃpati''' as to the Sāvitra (a form of Agni). For this impertinence his pupil was severely rebuked.<br>==Foot Notes==

अत्य्-अराति जानं-तपि
<u>'''Aty-arāti Jānaṃ-tapi,'''</u> though not a prince, was taught the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]] by '''[[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]] Satyahavya,''' and thereupon conquered the earth. When [[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]] reminded him of his indebtedness, and claimed a great reward, the warrior replied irascibly that he intended to conquer the '''Uttara Kurus,''' and that [[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]] would then become King of the Earth, Atyarāti himself being his general (''[[सेना|senā]]-pati''). [[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]] replied that as no mortal man could conquer the Uttara Kurus he was cheated of his reward.  He consequently procured Atyarāti's defeat and death at the hands of '''[[अमित्रतपन शुष्मिण शैब्य|Amitratapana Śuṣmiṇa Śaibya]].'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_47> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 23. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 214.</ref>

अत्रि
<u>'''Atri.'''</u>--Neither Atri himself nor the Atris can claim any historical reality,<ref name=fx1_ve1_48> For Atri in the Rigveda, see Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' 145. ''Cf.'' also Av. ii. 32, 3;<br> iv. 29, 3;<br> [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iv. 36, etc.;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 2, 4.</ref> beyond the fact that Maṇḍala V. of the Rigveda is attributed, no doubt correctly, to the family of the Atris.<ref name=fx2_ve1_48> ''Cf.'' Rv. v. 39, 5;<br> 67, 5;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxiv. 3;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, ii, 2, 1.</ref> The Atris as a family probably stood in close relations with the '''Priyamedhas'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_48> ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 45, 3;<br> 139, 9;<br> viii. 5, 25;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 22.</ref> and '''Kaṇvas,'''<ref name=fx4_ve1_48> ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 118, 7;<br> v. 41, 4;<br> x. 150, 5.</ref> perhaps also with the '''Gotamas'''<ref name=fx5_ve1_48> ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 183, 5.</ref> and '''Kākṣīvatas.'''<ref name=fx6_ve1_48> ''Cf.'' Rv. x. 143, 1.</ref> The mention of both the '''[[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]]''' and the '''[[यमुना|Yamunā]]''' in one hymn<ref name=fx7_ve1_48> Rv. v. 52, 9, 17. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 128, 142;<br> Bergaigne, ''Religion Védique,'' 2, 469;<br> Oldenber, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 212215;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 310.</ref> of the fifth Maṇḍala seems to justify the presumption that the family was spread over a wide extent of territory.

अथरी
<u>'''Atharī.'''</u>--This word occurs only in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_49> iv. 6, 8.</ref> and the sense is doubtful. Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve1_49> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> followed by most interpreters, renders it ‘point of a lance,’ but Pischel<ref name=fx3_ve1_49> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 99.</ref> thinks that it means ‘an elephant.’

अथर्वन्
<u>'''Atharvan.'''</u>--The name in the singular denotes the head of a semi-divine family of mythical priests,<ref name=fx1_ve1_50> See Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' 141. In the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 6, 3, [[अथर्वन्|Atharvan]] [[दैव|Daiva]] is characteristically the pupil of [[मृत्यु|Mṛtyu]].</ref> of whom nothing historical can be said. In the plural the family as a whole is meant. In a few places an actual family seems to be referred to. Thus, for instance, they are mentioned as recipients of gifts in the Dānastuti<ref name=fx2_ve1_50> Rv. vi. 47, 24.</ref> (‘Praise of Gifts’), of '''Aśvattha's'''  generosity; their use of milk mingled with honey in the ritual is referred to;<ref name=fx3_ve1_50> Rv. ix. 11, 2.</ref> and a cow that miscarries (''ava-tokā'') from accident is dedicated to the Atharvans, according to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_50> iii. 4, 11, 1. ''Cf.'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 15.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' xxxv. ''et seq.,'' who (p. xxxviii) takes ''avatokā'' as a woman, and the Atharvans as the hymns;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 174 ''et seq.''</ref>

अथर्वाणः
<u>'''Atharvāṇaḥ.'''</u>--This expression<ref name=fx1_ve1_51> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 12, 9, 1;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 10, 10;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 3, 5 ''et seq.''</ref> is used with '''Aṅgirasaḥ,''' to denote the Atharvaveda. The compound '''[[अथर्वाङ्गिरसः|Atharvāṅgirasaḥ]]''' is employed in the same sense.

अथर्वाङ्गिरसः
<u>'''Atharvāṅgirasaḥ.'''</u>--This is the collective name of the Atharvaveda in several passages<ref name=fx1_ve1_52> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 12, 8, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 9;<br> 10;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 6, 7;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 4, 10;<br> iv. 1, 2;<br> 5, 11;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 4, 1. 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 3, 1.</ref> of the later Brāhmaṇas. It occurs once in the Atharvaveda itself,<ref name=fx2_ve1_52> x. 7, 20.</ref> while the term Atharvaveda is not found before the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] period.<ref name=fx3_ve1_52> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 2, 9, etc.</ref> The compound seems, according to Bloomfield,<ref name=fx4_ve1_52> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 11, 387 ''et seq.;<br> Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' xviii. ''et seq.''</ref> to denote the two elements which make up the Atharvaveda. The former part refers to the auspicious practices of the Veda (''bheṣajāni'');<ref name=fx5_ve1_52> Av. xi. 6, 14.</ref> the latter to its hostile witchcraft, the ''yātu''<ref name=fx6_ve1_52> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 5, 2, 20.</ref> or ''abhi-cāra.''<ref name=fx7_ve1_52> [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 3, 19.</ref> This theory is supported by the names of the two mythic personages '''[[घोर आङ्गिरस|Ghora Āṅgirasa]]''' and '''[[भिषज् आथर्वण|Bhiṣaj Ātharvaṇa]],''' as well as by the connection of [[अथर्वाणः|Atharvāṇaḥ]] and '''Ātharvaṇāni''' with healing (''[[भेषज|bheṣaja]]'') in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx8_ve1_52> xii. 9, 10;<br> xvi. 10, 10.</ref> Moreover, the term ''bhesajā'' (‘remedies’) designates in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx9_ve1_52> x. 6, 14.</ref> that Veda itself, while in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx10_ve1_52> x. 5, 2, 20.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 177.</ref> ''yātu'' (‘sorcery’) conveys the same meaning. The evidence, however, being by no means convincing, it remains probable that there existed no clear differentiation between the two sages as responsible for the Atharvaveda as a whole. 

अ-दृष्ट
<u>'''A-dṛṣṭa.'''</u>--‘The unseen’ is a term used in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_53> Rv. i. 191, 4 = Av. vi. 52, 2.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_53> vi. 52, 3.</ref> to designate a species of vermin. The sun is also described as ‘the slayer of the unseen’ (''[[अदृष्ट|adṛṣṭa]]-han''),<ref name=fx3_ve1_53> Rv. i. 191, 9 = Av. vi. 52, 1;<br> Av. v. 23, 6.</ref> and as a counterpart a ‘seen’ (''[[दृष्ट|dṛṣṭa]]'') is mentioned.<ref name=fx4_ve1_53> Av. ii. 31, 2;<br> viii. 8, 15.</ref> In one passage<ref name=fx5_ve1_53> Av. v. 23, 6. 7.</ref> the epithets ‘seen’ and ‘unseen’ are applied to the worm ('''[[कृमि|Kṛmi]]'''), their use being no doubt due to the widespread theory of diseases being due to worms, whether discernable by examination or not.<ref name=fx6_ve1_53> Kuhn, ''Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprachforschung,'' 13, 135 ''et seq.;<br>'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 313315;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98.</ref>

अद्म-सद्
<u>'''Adma-sad.'''</u>--This expression (''lit.'' ‘sitting at the meal’), found several times in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_54> i. 124, 4;<br> vi. 30, 3;<br> vii. 83, 7;<br> viii. 44, 29;<br> ''adma-sadvan,'' vi. 4, 4.</ref> is usually rendered ‘guest at the feast,’ but Geldner<ref name=fx2_ve1_54> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 179, 180;<br> but ''of'' Oldenberg, ''Vedaforschung,'' 90.</ref> adduces reasons to show that it means ‘a fly,’ so called because of its settling on food.

अद्रि
<u>'''Adri.'''</u>--Zimmer<ref name=fx1_ve1_55> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 301. ''Cf.'' Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> deduces from the use of this word (‘rock,’ ‘stone’) in a passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_55> i. 51, 3.</ref> that sling-stones were used in Vedic fighting. But the passage is mythical, referring to Indra's aid, and cannot be used with any certainty as evidence for human war. More probably it merely denotes Indra's bolt. See also '''[[अशनि|Aśani]].'''

अधि-देवन
<u>'''Adhi-devana.'''</u>--The place where the dice were thrown is thus designated in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_56> v. 31, 6;<br> vi. 70, 1.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_56> v. 4, 4, 20. 22, 23.</ref> according to Lüders.<ref name=fx3_ve1_56> ''Das Würfelspiel im alten Indien,'' 11-13.</ref> Roth,<ref name=fx4_ve1_56> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> followed by Whitney, takes it to mean ‘gambling-board.’ See '''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]].'''

अधि-राज
<u>'''Adhi-rāja.'''</u>--The word occurs fairly often throughout the early literature,<ref name=fx1_ve1_57> Rv. x. 128, 9 Av. vi. 98, 1;<br> ix. 10, 24;<br> Taiturīya Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 14, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhita, iv. 12, 3;<br> Kāthaka Saṃhitā, viii. 17;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 2, 9 (''adhirājan'');<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 2, 2;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], viii. 2.</ref> denoting ‘overlord’ among kings or princes.  In no passage is it clear that a real over-king is meant, as the word ''[[राजन्|rājan]]'' may mean king or merely prince, a person of royal blood. On the whole it seems most probable that the word connotes no more than ‘king’ as opposed to ‘prince.’

अधि-षवण
<u>'''Adhi-ṣavaṇa.'''</u>--The two Adhiṣavaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve1_58> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 21;<br> Av. v. 20, 10;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 9, 4, 1;<br> 5, 3, 22 (''adhiṣavaṇe phalake'');<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 32 (''adhiṣavaṇaṃ carma,'' ‘the skin upon which the pressing takes place’;<br> ''adhiṣavaṇe phalake,'' ‘the boards on which the pressing takes place,’ etc.).</ref> are usually understood, as by Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_58> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> and Zimmer,<ref name=fx3_ve1_58> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 277.</ref> to designate the two boards between which the Soma was pressed. Hillebrandt,<ref name=fx4_ve1_58> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 148 ''et seq.''</ref> however, shows from the ritual that the boards were not placed one over the other, but were placed one behind the other, the two serving as a foundation upon which the Soma was pressed by a stone. This theory seems to account best for the etymological sense of the name ‘over-press,’ as well as for the use of the word as an adjective (‘used for pressing ''upon''’). But according to the procedure as witnessed by Haug<ref name=fx5_ve1_58> See Haug, [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], 2, p. 488, n. 10.</ref> in the Deccan, the shoots of the plant are first placed on the skin, one of the boards being then laid over them and pounded with a stone. The shoots are then taken out and placed upon the board, the second board being then laid over them.

अधी¤-वास
<u>'''Adhī¤-vāsa.'''</u>--This word<ref name=fx1_ve1_59> Rv. i. 140, 9;<br> 162, 16;<br> x. 5, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 5, 22 (''pratimuñc,'' ‘put on’);<br> 4, 4, 3 (''ā-[[स्तृ|stṛ]],'' ‘spread out’), etc.</ref> denotes the ‘upper garment’ of the Vedic Indian. Its exact nature is not described, but as the king in the ritual set forth in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_59> v. 3, 5, 19 ''et seq.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 268.</ref> puts on first an undergarment, then a garment, and finally an upper garment, it presumably denotes some sort of cloak or mantle.

अध्याण्डा
<u>'''Adhyāṇḍā.'''</u>--This is a plant mentioned with many others in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 8, 1, 16). <br>==Foot Notes==

अध्रि-गु
<u>'''Adhri-gu.'''</u>--This is the name of a man twice referred to in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_61> i. 112, 20;<br> viii. 12, 2. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 90.</ref> as a protégé of the Aśvins and of Indra respectively.

अध्वर्यु
<u>'''Adhvaryu.'''</u>--In one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_62> iii. 7, 7.</ref> Hillebrandt<ref name=fx2_ve1_62> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 423.</ref> thinks that the five Adhvaryus who are mentioned do not designate actual priests, but refer to the five planets which move about in the heavens like the [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]] priests on the sacrificial ground. See also '''[[ग्रह|Graha]].'''

अन्-अग्नि-दग्ध
<u>'''An-agni-dagdha,'''</u> ‘not burnt with fire.’ See '''[[अग्नि-दग्ध|Agni-dagdha]],''' ‘burnt with fire.’<br>==Foot Notes==

अनड्-वाह्
<u>'''Anaḍ-vāh'''</u> (lit. ‘cart-drawer’).--This is the common<ref name=fx1_ve1_64> Rv. x. 59, 10;<br> 85, 10;<br> iii. 53, 18;<br> Av. iii. 11, 5;<br> iv. 11, 1, etc.;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 14;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 4, 17, etc.</ref> name of oxen as employed for drawing carts ('''Anas'''). Such oxen were normally castrated,<ref name=fx2_ve1_64> ''Cf.'' Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 1, 5 (''anaḍvān sāṇḍaḥ'').</ref> though not always. Female draft cattle were also used (''anaḍuhī''), but rarely.<ref name=fx3_ve1_64> Av. iv. 11;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v, 3, 4, 11. 13.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 151, n.;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 226.</ref> See also '''Gō.'''

अनस्
<u>'''Anas.'''</u>--This is the term<ref name=fx1_ve1_65> Rv. iv. 30, 10;<br> x. 85, 10;<br> 86, 18, etc.;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 2, 5, etc.;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vii. 15, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 8, etc.</ref> used to designate the draft wagon, as opposed to the chariot (''[[रथ|ratha]]'') for war or sport, with which it is sometimes expressly contrasted,<ref name=fx2_ve1_65> Rv. iii. 33, 9.</ref> though Indra is once said to be ‘seated in a wagon’ (''anar-[[विश्|viś]]'')<ref name=fx3_ve1_65> Rv. i. 121, 7.</ref> instead of on a chariot. Though Uṣas, Goddess of Dawn, sometimes rides on a chariot (''[[रथ|ratha]]''), the wagon is her characteristic vehicle.<ref name=fx4_ve1_65> Rv. ii. 15, 6;<br> iv. 30, 11;<br> viii. 91, 7;<br> x. 73, 6;<br> 138, 5.</ref> Of its construction we know little. The bridal wagon on which Sūryā, the daughter of the Sun, was borne in the marriage hymn in the Rigveda had a covering ('''[[छदिस्|Chadis]]''').<ref name=fx5_ve1_65> Rv. x. 85, 10.</ref> The axle-box ('''Kha''') is also  mentioned.<ref name=fx6_ve1_65> Rv. viii. 91, 7;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3.</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx7_ve1_65> xv. 2, 1.</ref> [[विपथ|Vipatha]] appears to denote a rough vehicle used for bad tracks. The wagon was usually drawn by oxen ('''[[अनड्वाह्|Anaḍvāh]]'''), as in wedding processions.<ref name=fx8_ve1_65> Rv. x. 85, 11</ref> The wagon of Dawn is described as drawn by ruddy cows or bulls.<ref name=fx9_ve1_65> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' 47.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 246;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 4.</ref>

अनास्
<u>'''Anās.'''</u> See '''[[दस्यु|Dasyu]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अनितभा
<u>'''Anitabhā'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_67> v. 53. 9.</ref> is taken by Max Müller<ref name=fx2_ve1_67> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 323;<br> but ''of.'' '''[[रसा|Rasā]].'''</ref> to denote some river.

अनु
<u>'''Anu, Ānava.'''</u>--Grassmann and Roth<ref name=fx1_ve1_68> St. Petersburg Dictionary.</ref> see in these words designations of people foreign to the Aryans. But it is clear<ref name=fx2_ve1_68> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 125.</ref> that they denote a special people, the Anus, who are mentioned with the '''Yadus, Turvaśas, Druhyus,''' and '''Pūrus,'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_68> Rv. i. 108, 8.</ref> with the Druhyus,<ref name=fx4_ve1_68> Rv. vii. 18, 14.</ref> and with the Turvaśas, Yadus, and Druhyus.<ref name=fx5_ve1_68> viii. 10, 5.</ref> It is also a fair conclusion from their mention in a passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve1_68> Rv. viii. 74. 15, compared with vii. 18, 14.</ref> that they dwelt on the [[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]]. The inference that the Bhṛgus were connected with this tribe is much more doubtful,<ref name=fx7_ve1_68> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 221, n. 1.</ref> for it rests solely on the fact that in one place<ref name=fx8_ve1_68> Rv. vii. 18, 4.</ref> the Bhṛgus and Druhyus are mentioned together, and not Anus and Druhyus. [[आनव|Ānava]] is used as an epithet of Agni,<ref name=fx9_ve1_68> Rv. viii. 74, 4. ''Cf.'' Rv. v. 31, 4, where the Anus prepare the chariot of the Aśvins.</ref> but also in the sense of ‘Anu prince,’<ref name=fx10_ve1_68> Rv. vii. 18, 13.</ref> in one case in conjunction with [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]].<ref name=fx11_ve1_68> viii. 4, 1. Apparently as prince also in vi. 62, 9. ''Cf.'' '''[[कुरुङ्ग|Kuruṅga]].'''<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 205;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 153;<br> Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 154.</ref>

अनु-क्षत्तृ
<u>'''Anu-kṣattṛ.'''</u>--This word occurs in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha,<ref name=fx1_ve1_69> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 11;<br> 73;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 9, 1.</ref> and means, according to Mahīdhara,<ref name=fx2_ve1_69> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> ‘an attendant on the door-keeper,’ and, according to Sāyaṇa, ‘an attendant on the charioteer’ (''[[सारथि|sārathi]]''). See also '''[[क्षत्तृ|Kṣattṛ]].'''(**  3) On [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.'' 

अनु-चर
<u>'''Anu-cara.'''</u>--This is a general expression<ref name=fx1_ve1_70> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 13;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 7, 1.</ref> for an ‘attendant’ (the feminine being Anucarī),<ref name=fx2_ve1_70> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 27 (apparently slave girls are meant, 400 being enumerated).</ref> but it is not often used.

अनु-मति
<u>'''Anu-mati.'''</u> See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अनु-राधा
<u>'''Anu-rādhā.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अनु-वक्तृ सत्य सात्य-कीर्त
<u>'''Anu-vaktṛ Satya Sātya-kīrta'''</u> is mentioned as a teacher in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (i. 5, 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

अनुव्या-ख्यान
<u>'''Anuvyā-khyāna'''</u> is a species of writing referred to in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_74> ii. 4, 10;<br> iv. 1, 2;<br> 5, 11.</ref> Śaṅkara interprets it as ‘explanation of the Mantras.’ As the term, in the plural, follows '''Sūtras,''' this interpretation is reasonable. Sieg,<ref name=fx2_ve1_74> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 34.</ref> however, equates the word with '''[[अन्वाख्यान|Anvākhyāna]],''' ‘supplementary narrative.’

अनु-शासन
<u>'''Anu-śāsana'''</u> in the plural denotes in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xi. 5, 6, 8) some form of literature; according to Sāyaṇa, the Vedāṅgas.<br>==Foot Notes==

अनु-शिख
<u>'''Anu-śikha'''</u> is the name of the [[पोतृ|Potṛ]] at the snake festival in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_76> xxv. 15. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 35.</ref>

अन्ते-वासिन्
<u>'''Ante-vāsin,'''</u> ‘dwelling near,’ is the epithet of the '''Brahmacārin''' who lives in the house of his teacher. The expression does not occur before the late [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] period.<ref name=fx1_ve1_77> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, 5, 17;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 3, 7;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 11, 5;<br> iv. 10, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 3, 3;<br> 11, 1.</ref> Secrecy is often enjoined on others than Antevāsins.<ref name=fx2_ve1_77> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 6;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, viii, 11.</ref>

अन्ध्र
<u>'''Andhra'''</u> is the name of a people, and is mentioned with the '''Puṇḍras, Śabaras, Pulindas,''' and '''Mūtibas,''' as being the outcasts resulting from the refusal of the fifty eldest sons of '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]''' to accept his adoption of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]].'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_78> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 18;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 26, where instead of ''udāntyaḥ'' (‘beyond the borders’) the reading is ''udañcaḥ'' (‘northern’), but the former is obviously correct. The Sāṅkhāyana omits the Pulindas, and has Mūcīpas.</ref> It may fairly be deduced  from this statement that these people were recognized as nonAryan, as the Andhras certainly seem to have been.<ref name=fx2_ve1_78> Vincent Smith, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 56, 657 ''et seq.,'' who places them originally in Eastern India between the Kṛṣṇā and Godāvarī rivers;<br> ''cf.'' Rapson, ''Catalogue of Indian Coins,'' xv., xvi.;<br> Bhandarkar, ''Bombay Gazetteer,'' 1. ii. 138.</ref>

अन्यतः-प्लक्षा
<u>'''Anyataḥ-plakṣā'''</u> (‘with wave-leafed fig-trees on one side only’) is the name of a lake in [[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]] according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_79> xi. 5, 1, 4.</ref> where it occurs in the story of [[पुरूरवस्|Purūravas]] and Urvaśī. Pischel<ref name=fx2_ve1_79> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 217.</ref> places it somewhere in Sirmor.

अन्य-वाप
<u>'''Anya-vāpa'''</u> (‘sowing for others’).--The cuckoo is so called<ref name=fx1_ve1_80> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 37;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 18.</ref> from its habit of depositing its eggs in the nests of other birds

अन्वा-ख्यान
<u>'''Anvā-khyāna.'''</u>--From the literal translation (‘after-story’) the meaning of ‘supplementary narrative’ seems to follow. In two<ref name=fx1_ve1_81> vi. 5, 2, 22;<br> 6, 4, 7 (the reference is to vi. 6, 4, 8).</ref> of its three occurrences in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] this sense is hardly felt, the expression being used to indicate a subsequent portion of the book itself. But in the third<ref name=fx2_ve1_81> xi. 1, 6, 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 34.</ref> passage it is distinguished from the '''[[इतिहास|Itihāsa]]''' (‘story’) proper, and there must mean ‘supplementary narrative.’ ''Cf.'' '''[[अनुव्याख्यान|Anuvyākhyāna]].'''

अप-चित्
<u>'''Apa-cit.'''</u>--This word occurs several times in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_82> vi. 25, 1;<br> 83, 1;<br> vii. 75, 1;<br> 77, 1.</ref> It is held by Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve1_82> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> Zimmer,<ref name=fx3_ve1_82> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 97. So also Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda,  342, 500.</ref> and others to denote an insect whose sting produced swellings, etc. (''glau''). But Bloomfield<ref name=fx4_ve1_82> ''American Journal of Philology,'' 11, 320 ''et seq.;<br> Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 503, 504. ''Cf.'' Jolly, ''Medicin,'' 89;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 343.</ref> shows that the disease, scrofulous swellings, is what is really meant, as is shown by the rendering (''gaṇḍa-mālā,'' ‘inflammation of the glands of the neck’) of Keśava and Sāyaṇa, and by the parallelism of the later disease, ''apacī,'' the derivation being from ''apa'' and ''ci,'' ‘to pick off.’ 

अप-श्रय
<u>'''Apa-śraya.'''</u> See '''Upaśraya.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अप-स्कम्भ
<u>'''Apa-skambha.'''</u>--The word occurs only in one passage of the Atharvaveda, where the tip of it is mentioned as poisoned. Roth<ref name=fx1_ve1_84> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' The passage is Av. iv. 6, 4.</ref> suggests that the fastening of the arrow-point to the shaft is meant. Whitney<ref name=fx2_ve1_84> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 153.</ref> inclines to this version, but suggests corruption of text. Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve1_84> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 300.</ref> follows Roth. Ludwig<ref name=fx4_ve1_84> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 512.</ref> renders the word by ‘barb.’ Bloomfield<ref name=fx5_ve1_84> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 375.</ref> thinks it means ‘tearing (arrow),’ a sense deduced from the etymology.

अपाच्यस्
<u>'''Apācyas.'''</u>--The kings of the ‘Westerners’ are referred to in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 14) in connection with those of the '''Nīcyas.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अपान
<u>'''Apāna.'''</u>--The word appears repeatedly in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_86> Av. ii. 28, 3;<br> v. 30, 12, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 19;<br> 24, etc.</ref> and later as one of the vital breaths ('''[[प्राण|Prāṇa]]'''), usually with [[प्राण|Prāṇa]], and often with one or more of the other three. Its original sense<ref name=fx2_ve1_86> See Caland, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' lv. 261;<br> 56, 556-558, correcting Ewing, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 22, 249 ''et seq.''</ref> appears to have been ‘inspiration.’ Its connection with the lower part of the body (''[[नाभि|nābhi]],'' ‘navel’), which is found already in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_86> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 4, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Deussen, ''Philosophy of the Upanishads,'' 263 ''et seq.''</ref> is not unnatural.

अपा-मार्ग
<u>'''Apā-mārga.'''</u>--A plant (''Achyranthes aspera'') used frequently<ref name=fx1_ve1_87> Atharvaveda, iv. 17, 6;<br> 18, 7;<br> 19, 4;<br> vii. 65, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxv. 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 1, 8;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2, 4, 14;<br> xiii. 8, 4, 4.</ref> in witchcraft practices, and for medical purposes, especially against '''[[क्षेत्रिय|Kṣetriya]].''' It is described in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_87> iv. 17, 2.</ref> as ‘revertive’ (''[[पुनः-सर|punaḥ-sara]]''), either, as Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_87> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> and Zimmer<ref name=fx4_ve1_87> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 67.</ref> think, because of its having reverted leaves (a view also accepted by Whitney<ref name=fx5_ve1_87> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 180.</ref> ),  or because, as Bloomfield<ref name=fx6_ve1_87> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 394. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 160, 161;<br> Weber ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 94.</ref> holds, it wards off a spell by causing it to recoil on its user.

अप-लम्ब
<u>'''Apa-lamba.'''</u>--By this word<ref name=fx1_ve1_88> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 4, 13. ''Cf.'' Caland and Henry, ''L'Agniṣṭoma,'' 50;<br> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 79.</ref> is denoted a brake or drag, let down (from ''lamb,'' ‘hang down’) to check the speed of a wagon.

अपाष्ठ
<u>'''Apāṣṭha.'''</u>--This word occurs twice in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_89> iv. 6, 5;<br> v. 18, 7 (''śatāpāṣṭha,'' ‘huṅdred-barbed’). ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 300;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 375.</ref> denoting the barb of an arrow.

अपि-शर्वर
<u>'''Api-śarvara.'''</u> See '''Anan.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अपी
<u>'''Apī.'''</u>--Ludwig<ref name=fx1_ve1_91> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 158, 159.</ref> finds an [[अपी|Apī]] whose sons are described as not performing sacrifice (''a-yajña-sāc'') and as breakers of the law of [[मित्र|Mitra]]-Varuṇa in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_91> vi. 67, 9.</ref> Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_91> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v., apya.''</ref> and Grassmann take the expression used (''apyaḥ putrāḥ'') as referring to the sons of the waters.

अपूप
<u>'''Apūpa'''</u> is the general word from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_92> iii. 52, 7.</ref> onwards for a cake, which might be mixed with ghee (''ghṛtavant''),<ref name=fx2_ve1_92> Rv. x. 45, 9.</ref> or be made of rice (''[[व्रीहि|vrīhi]]''),<ref name=fx3_ve1_92> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 3, 12, 13.</ref> or of barley (''yava'').<ref name=fx4_ve1_92> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 2, 5, 19.</ref> In the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_92> iii. 1, 1.</ref> there is a difference of interpretation. Max Müller renders it as ‘hive,’ Bo7htlingk as ‘honeycomb,’ Little<ref name=fx6_ve1_92> ''Grammatical Index, s.v.''</ref> as ‘cake.’

अप्नवान
<u>'''Apnavāna'''</u> appears only twice in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_93> iv. 7, 1;<br> viii. 91, 4.</ref> as an ancient sage, coupled with the Bhṛgus, to whose family Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_93> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 128.</ref> conjectures him to have belonged. 

अ-प्रति-रथ
<u>'''A-prati-ratha'''</u> (‘he who has no match in fight’) is the name of an obviously invented [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]], to whom is ascribed by the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_94> viii. 10.</ref> and Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_94> ix. 2, 3, 1. 5.</ref> the composition of a Rigveda hymn<ref name=fx3_ve1_94> x. 103.</ref> celebrating Indra as the invincible warrior.

अप्वा
<u>'''Apvā.'''</u>--A disease affecting the stomach,<ref name=fx1_ve1_95> Av. ix. 8, 9.</ref> possibly dysentery, as suggested by Zimmer,<ref name=fx2_ve1_95> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 389.</ref> on the ground that the disease is invoked to confound the enemy.<ref name=fx3_ve1_95> Rv. x. 103, 12 = Av. iii. 2, 5 = [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]], ii. 1211 = Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvii. 44.</ref> Weber<ref name=fx4_ve1_95> ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 482;<br> 17, 184.</ref> considers that it is diarrhœa induced by fear, as often in the Epic.<ref name=fx5_ve1_95> ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 184.</ref> This view is supported by Bloomfield,<ref name=fx6_ve1_95> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 327.</ref> and was apparently that of [[यास्क|Yāska]].<ref name=fx7_ve1_95> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 33.<br><br>''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 86, 87.</ref>

अप्सस्
<u>'''Apsas.'''</u>--This word usually refers to the body, meaning ‘front part.’<ref name=fx1_ve1_96> See Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 308-313;<br> 2, 245, 246.</ref> In one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_96> i. 122, 15. ''Cf.'' Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> however, the adjective ‘with a long front part’ (''[[दीर्घाप्सस्|dīrghāpsas]]'') is applied to the chariot ('''[[रथ|Ratha]]''').

अभि-क्रोशक
<u>'''Abhi-krośaka'''</u> designates one of the victims in the Puruṣamedha, meaning, perhaps, ‘herald.’ The commentator Mahīdhara<ref name=fx1_ve1_97> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 20. ''Cf.'' Anukrośaka, [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 15, 1.</ref> renders it as ‘reviler’ (''nindaka'').

अभि-जित्
<u>'''Abhi-jit.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अभि-पित्व
<u>'''Abhi-pitva.'''</u> See '''Ahan.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अभि-प्रतारिन् काक्ष-सेनि
<u>'''Abhi-pratārin Kākṣa-seni'''</u> is mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_100> i. 59, 1;<br> iii. 1, 21;<br> 2, 2. 13.</ref> the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_100> iv. 3, 5.</ref> and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_100> x. 5, 7;<br> xiv. 1, 12. 15.</ref> as engaged in discussions on philosophy. The Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_100> iii. 156 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 26, 61).</ref> further reports that his sons divided the property amongst themselves while he was yet alive. He was a Kuru and a prince. 

अभि-प्रश्निन्
<u>'''Abhi-praśnin.'''</u>--This term occurs after '''Praśnin,''' and followed by '''Praśnavivāka''' in the list of victims for the Puruṣamedha given in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_101> iii. 4, 6, 1.</ref> and the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve1_101> xxx. 10.</ref> The commentators, Sāyaṇa and Mahīdhara, see in it merely a reference to an inquisitive man. But there can be little doubt that the term must have had a legal reference of some sort-perhaps indicating the defendant as opposed to plaintiff and judge.

अभि-श्री
<u>'''Abhi-śrī'''</u> (‘admixture’).--This word<ref name=fx1_ve1_102> Rv. ix. 79, 5;<br> 86, 27. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 227;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' i. 211.</ref> designates the milk used to mingle with the Soma juice before it was offered.

अभि-षवणी
<u>'''Abhi-ṣavaṇī.'''</u>--Zimmer<ref name=fx1_ve1_103> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 277.</ref> renders the expression in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_103> ix. 6, 16.</ref> as a pressing instrument, but it appears to be merely an adjective, (waters) ‘used in pressing.’<ref name=fx3_ve1_103> ''Cf.'' Whitney's Translation of Av. ix. 6, 16.</ref>

अभि-षेक
<u>'''Abhi-ṣeka'''</u> (‘besprinkling’).--The Vedic king was consecrated after his election with an elaborate ritual, which is fully described in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_104> i. 7, 5.</ref> Pañcaviṃśa,<ref name=fx2_ve1_104> xviii. 8 ''et seq.''</ref> Śatapatha,<ref name=fx3_ve1_104> v. 3, 3 ''et seq.''</ref> and [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx4_ve1_104> viii. 5 ''et seq.''</ref> and for which the Mantras are given in the Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx5_ve1_104> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 11;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 6;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 1-4.</ref> The consecration took place by sprinkling with water (''abhiṣecanīyā āpaḥ'').<ref name=fx6_ve1_104> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 5, 10-15,</ref> Only kings could be consecrated, the people not being worthy of it (''anabhiṣecanīyāḥ'').<ref name=fx7_ve1_104> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 2, 17.</ref> The sprinkler (''abhiṣektṛ'') is mentioned in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha.<ref name=fx8_ve1_104> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 8, 1.</ref> The [[अभिषेक|Abhiṣeka]] is an essential part of the '''[[राजसूय|Rājasūya]],''' or sacrifice of royal inauguration, being the second of its component members.(**  9 ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Rituallitteratur,'' 143-147; Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, xxvi; Weber, ''Über den [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]].'' 

अभीशु
<u>'''Abhīśu'''</u> is a common Vedic word<ref name=fx1_ve1_105> Rv. i. 38, 12;<br> v. 44, 4;<br> vi. 75, 6;<br> viii. 33, 11;<br> Av. vi. 137, 2;<br> viii. 8, 22;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 3, 14 (where it = ''raśmayaḥ,'' ‘reins’), etc.</ref> denoting the ‘reins’ or ‘bridle’ of the chariot horses. The use of the plural is due to the fact that two or four horses, possibly five (''daśābhīśu'' ‘tenbridled’),<ref name=fx2_ve1_105> Rv. x. 94, 7.</ref> were yoked to the car.

अभ्य्-अग्नि ऐतशायन
<u>'''Abhy-agni Aitaśāyana.'''</u>--This man was, according to the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_106> vi. 33.</ref> unfortunate enough to quarrel with his father, '''[[ऐतश|Aitaśa]].''' The result was that he and his progeny were called the worst of the '''Aurvas.''' In the version of the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_106> xxx. 5. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 173.</ref> the '''Aitaśāyana Ājāneyas''' take the place of the Abhyagnis and the '''Bhṛgus''' of the '''Aurvas,''' the latter being probably a branch of the former family.

अभ्या-वर्तिन् चायमान
<u>'''Abhyā-vartin Cāyamāna'''</u> appears in a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’) in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_107> vi. 27, 8. 5.</ref> and as conqueror of the Vṛcīvants under the leader '''[[वरशिख|Varaśikha]].''' It is probable though not absolutely certain, that he is identical with the '''[[सृञ्जय|Sṛñjaya]] [[दैववात|Daivavāta]],''' mentioned in the same hymn<ref name=fx2_ve1_107> vi. 27, 7.</ref> as having the '''Turvaśas''' and '''Vṛcīvants''' defeated for him by Indra. In this case he would be prince (''[[सम्राज्|samrāj]]'') of the Sṛñjayas. [[दैववात|Daivavāta]] is mentioned elsewhere<ref name=fx3_ve1_107> iv. 15, 4.</ref> as a worshipper of Agni.<br><br>Abhyāvartin is also referred to as a [[पार्थव|Pārthava]]. Ludwig<ref name=fx4_ve1_107> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 198 ''et seq.''</ref> and Hillebrandt<ref name=fx5_ve1_107> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 105;<br> 3, 268, n. 1. ''Cf.'' Grierson, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 604 ''et seq.''</ref> maintained that he is thus a Parthian, the latter using the evidence of the two places mentioned in the description<ref name=fx6_ve1_107> Rv. vi. 27, 5. 6.</ref> of Daivavāta's victories, '''[[हरियूपीया|Hariyūpīyā]]''' and '''[[यव्यावती|Yavyāvatī]],''' as proofs for the western position of Abhyāvartin's people in Arachosia, in Iran. But Zimmer<ref name=fx7_ve1_107> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 133 ''et seq.,'' 433;<br> Bergaigne, ''Religion Védique,'' 2, 362.</ref> is probably right in holding that the name [[पार्थव|Pārthava]] merely means ‘a descendant of [[पृथु|Pṛthu]],’ and that its similarity to the Iranian Parthians is only on a par with the numerous other points of identity between the Indian and Iranian cultures. 

अ-भ्रातरः
<u>'''A-bhrātaraḥ'''</u> (‘brotherless’).--The lot of girls without brothers is referred to in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_108> i. 124, 7;<br> iv. 5, 5. ''Cf.'' Av. i. 17, 1.</ref> as unsatisfactory--apparently they became prostitutes. The [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_108> iii. 5 (''abhrātrī'').<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 259;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 328.</ref> expressly forbids marriage with a brotherless maiden, probably because of the risk of her being made a ''[[पुत्रिका|putrikā]]'' (‘adoptive daughter’) by her father--that is, any son of hers being counted as belonging to her father's, instead of to her husband's, family. See '''[[अयोगू|Ayogū]].'''

अभ्रि
<u>'''Abhri'''</u> (‘spade’) is a Vedic word<ref name=fx1_ve1_109> Av. iv. 7, 5. 6 (''[[अभ्रि|abhri]]-khāte'' is ‘dug out with a spade,’ not ‘prepared ground’ with Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'');<br> x. 4, 14;<br> ''hiraṇyayībhir abhribhiḥ,'' ‘with golden spades’);<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, v. 22;<br> xi. 10;<br> xxxvii. 1;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 3, 2, 15, etc.</ref> of frequent occurrence. Various possible materials and forms are enumerated in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_109> vi. 3, 1, 30 ''et seq.''</ref> It may be made of bamboo or of the wood of [[विकङ्कत|Vikaṅkata]] or [[उदुम्बर|Udumbara]]. It may be a span or a cubit in size. It is hollow, and either one or both edges are sharp. From this it would appear that the handle was made of some wood, but the head of some metal.

अमत्र
<u>'''Amatra'''</u> was a vessel into which the Soma, after being pressed, was poured,<ref name=fx1_ve1_110> Rv. ii. 14, 1;<br> v. 51, 4;<br> vi. 42, 2, etc.</ref> and out of which the libation to the god was made.<ref name=fx2_ve1_110> Rv. x. 29, 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 278;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]] Noten,'' 1, 61.</ref>

अमला
<u>'''Amalā.'''</u>--This plant<ref name=fx1_ve1_111> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 38, 6.</ref> is probably the ''Emblica officinalis,'' or Myrobalan tree; also called '''[[आमलक|Āmalaka]],''' or '''Āmalakā.'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_111> The reading in Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vii. 3, 1, is ''vāmalake,'' which may give ''a¤°'' or ''ā°.''</ref>

अमा-जुर्
<u>'''Amā-jur'''</u> is an epithet<ref name=fx1_ve1_112> Rv. ii. 17, 7;<br> viii. 21, 15;<br> x. 37, 3.</ref> denoting maidens ‘who grow old at home’ without finding husbands, or, as they are elsewhere called, ‘who sit with their father’ (''[[पितृ|pitṛ]]-ṣad''). A well-known example of such was [[घोषा|Ghoṣā]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_112> Rv. i. 117, 7. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 305.</ref> 

अमा-वास्य शाण्दिल्यायन
<u>'''Amā-vāsya Śāṇdilyāyana'''</u> is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_113> ''Indische Studien,'' iv. 373.</ref> as the teacher of '''[[अंशु|Aṃśu]] [[धानंजय्य|Dhānaṃjayya]].'''

अमित्र-तपन शुष्मिण शैब्य
<u>'''Amitra-tapana Śuṣmiṇa Śaibya'''</u> is the name of him who killed '''[[अत्य्अराति जानंतपि|Atyarāti Jānaṃtapi]],''' according to the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 23).<br>==Foot Notes==

अ-मूला
<u>'''A-mūlā'''</u> (‘without root’) is the name in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_115> v. 314. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 286;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 279, accepts ‘rootless (plant).’</ref> of a plant (''Methonica superba''), which was used for poisoning arrows. Bloomfield,<ref name=fx2_ve1_115> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 457.</ref> however, renders it as ‘movable property.’

अम्बरीष
<u>'''Ambarīṣa'''</u> is mentioned as a [[वार्षागिर|Vārṣāgira]] in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_116> i. 100, 17. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 140.</ref> along with '''[[ऋज्राश्व|Ṛjrāśva]], [[सहदेव|Sahadeva]], [[सुराधस्|Surādhas]],''' and '''[[भयमान|Bhayamāna]].'''

अम्बष्ठ
<u>'''Ambaṣṭha.'''</u> See '''[[आम्बष्ठ्य|Āmbaṣṭhya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अय
<u>'''Aya.'''</u> See '''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अयस्
<u>'''Ayas.'''</u>--The exact metal denoted by this word when used by itself, as always in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_119> Rv. i. 57, 3;<br> 163, 9;<br> iv. 2, 17;<br> vi. 3, 5.</ref> is uncertain. As favouring the sense of ‘bronze’ rather than that of ‘iron’ may perhaps be cited with Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve1_119> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 52.</ref> the fact that Agni is called ''ayo-[[दंष्ट्र|daṃṣṭra]],'' ‘with teeth of Ayas,’<ref name=fx3_ve1_119> Rv. i. 88, 5;<br> x. 87, 2.</ref> with reference to the colour of his flames, and that the car-seat of [[मित्र|Mitra]] and Varuṇa is called ''ayaḥ-sthūṇa,''<ref name=fx4_ve1_119> Rv. v. 62, 8 (''cf.'' 7).</ref> ‘with pillars of Ayas’ at the setting of the sun.<ref name=fx5_ve1_119> But this is not convincing, as in the same verse it is said to be ‘of golden appearance at the flush of dawn.’</ref> Moreover, in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx6_ve1_119> xviii. 13.</ref> Ayas is enumerated in a list of six metals: gold (''[[हिरण्य|hiraṇya]]''), Ayas, [[श्याम|Śyāma]], Loha, lead (''[[सीस|sīsa]]''), tin (''[[त्रपु|trapu]]''). Here ''[[श्याम|śyāma]]'' (‘swarthy’) and ''loha'' (‘red’) must mean ‘iron’ and ‘copper’ respectively; ''ayas'' would therefore seem to mean ‘bronze.’ In many passages in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx7_ve1_119> xi. 3, 1. 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 9.</ref> and  other books, the Ayas is divided into two species--the ''[[श्याम|śyāma]]'' (‘iron’) and the ''[[लोहित|lohita]]'' (‘copper’ or ‘bronze’). In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx8_ve1_119> v. 4, 1, 2.</ref> a distinction is drawn between Ayas and ''[[लोहायस|lohāyasa]],'' which may either be a distinction between iron and copper as understood by Eggeling,<ref name=fx9_ve1_119> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 90</ref> or between copper and bronze as held by Schrader.<ref name=fx10_ve1_119> ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 189.</ref> In one passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx11_ve1_119> v. 28, 1.</ref> the sense of iron seems certain. Possibly, too, the arrow of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx12_ve1_119> vi. 75, 15.</ref> which had a tip of Ayas (''yasyā ayo mukham''), was pointed with iron. Copper, however, is conceivable, and bronze quite likely.<br><br>Iron is called ''[[श्याम|śyāma]] ayas'' or ''[[श्याम|śyāma]]'' alone.<ref name=fx13_ve1_119> Av. ix. 5, 4.</ref> See also '''[[कार्ष्णायस|Kārṣṇāyasa]].''' Copper is '''[[लोहायस|Lohāyasa]]''' or '''[[लोहितायस|Lohitāyasa]].'''<br><br>The smelting (''dhmā'' ‘to blow’) of the metal is frequently referred to. The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx14_ve1_119> vi. 1, 3, 5. ''Cf.'' vi. 1, 1, 13;<br> v. 1, 2, 14;<br> xii. 7, 1, 7;<br> 2, 10, etc.</ref> states that if ‘well smelted’ (''bahu-dhmātam'') it is like gold, referring evidently to bronze. A heater of Ayas is mentioned in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx15_ve1_119> xxx. 14;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 10, 1.</ref> and bowls of Ayas are also spoken of.<ref name=fx16_ve1_119> Av. viii. 10, 22;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 13.</ref>

अय-स्थूण
<u>'''Aya-sthūṇa.'''</u>--He was Gṛhapati (‘householder,’ the sacrificer at sacrificial sessions) of those whose [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]] was Śaulvāyana, and taught the latter the proper mode of using certain spoons.<ref name=fx1_ve1_120> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 4, 2, 17 ''et seq.''</ref>

अयास्य आङ्गिरस
<u>'''Ayāsya Āṅgirasa.'''</u>--This sage appears to be mentioned in two passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_121> x. 67, 1;<br> 108, 8. Perhaps x. 92. 15 also refers to him, but not i. 62, 7;<br> x. 138, 4.</ref> and the Anukramaṇī ascribes to him several hymns of the Rigveda (ix. 44-46; x. 67; 68). In the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] tradition he was Udgātṛ at the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]] or Royal Inauguration Sacrifice, at which [[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]] was to have been slain, and his Udgītha ([[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]] chant) is referred to elsewhere.<ref name=fx3_ve1_121> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 2. 6;<br> 8, 3. ''Cf.'' Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 2, 12.</ref> He is also referred to several times as a ritual(**  2) [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 16.  authority.<ref name=fx4_ve1_121> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 3, 22;<br> xvi. 12, 4;<br> xi. 8, 10;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 3, 8. 19. 24;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxx. 6.</ref> In the Vaṃśas, or Genealogies of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx5_ve1_121> ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 (in both recensions).<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 136;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 159;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 255, n.;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 204.</ref> he is named as the pupil of Ābhūti [[त्वाष्ट्र|Tvāṣṭra]].

अयोगू
<u>'''Ayogū'''</u> is a word of quite doubtful meaning, found in the list of victims in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_122> xxx. 5;<br> Taithrīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 1, 1.</ref> It may, like the late ''[[आयोगव|āyogava]],'' denote a member of a mixed caste (theoretically a descendant of a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] by a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] wife).<ref name=fx2_ve1_122> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> Weber<ref name=fx3_ve1_122> ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 76, n. b. In the ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 18, 277, he thought it referred to dicing (''ayas''). Risley, ''Peoples of India,'' 250, regards the Āyogavas as a functional caste of carpenters (''cf.'' Manu, x. 48).</ref> rendered it as ‘unchaste woman.’<ref name=fx4_ve1_122> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 328.</ref> Zimmer thinks it denotes a brotherless maiden who is exposed to the dangers of prostitution (''cf. [[आयोगव|āyogava]]'').

अर
<u>'''Ara.'''</u> See '''[[रथ|Ratha]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अरटु
<u>'''Araṭu.'''</u>--A plant<ref name=fx1_ve1_124> Av. xx. 131, 17.</ref> (''Colosanthes Indica'') from the wood of which the axle of a chariot was sometimes made.<ref name=fx2_ve1_124> Rv. viii. 46, 27.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 62, 247.</ref>

अरण्य
<u>'''Araṇya.'''</u>--This term denotes the uncultivated land--not necessarily forest land--beyond the village. It is contrasted with home (''amā''),<ref name=fx1_ve1_125> Rv. vi. 24, 10.</ref> and with the plough land (''[[कृषि|kṛṣi]]''),<ref name=fx2_ve1_125> Av. ii. 4, 5.</ref> being spoken of as apart (''tiras'') from men.<ref name=fx3_ve1_125> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 6, 2, 20.</ref> It is also contrasted with the '''[[ग्राम|Grāma]],'''<ref name=fx4_ve1_125> Av. xii. 1, 56;<br> Rv. i. 163, 11;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 45;<br> xx. 17.</ref> and it is the place where thieves live.<ref name=fx5_ve1_125> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2, 3, 5;<br> xiii. 2, 4, 4.</ref> The character of the forest is described in a hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve1_125> x. 146.</ref> to the forest spirit (Araṇyānī). The dead are carried there for burial,<ref name=fx7_ve1_125> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 11.</ref> and hermits live there.<ref name=fx8_ve1_125> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 5, 3.</ref> Forest fires were common.<ref name=fx9_ve1_125> Rv. i. 65, 4;<br> 94, 10. 11;<br> ii. 14, 2;<br> x. 92, 1;<br> 142, 4;<br> Av. vii. 50, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 48, 142.</ref> 

अरत्नि
<u>'''Aratni.'''</u>--This word, which primarily means ‘elbow,’ occurs frequently from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_126> Rv. viii. 80, 8;<br> Av. xix. 57, 6;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 3, 1, 33, etc. For Rv. viii. 80, 8, see also [[आजि|Āji]].</ref> onwards as denoting a measure of length (‘ell’ or ‘cubit’), the distance from the elbow to the tip of the hand. The exact length nowhere appears from the early texts.

अ-राजानः
<u>'''A-rājānaḥ,'''</u> ‘not princes,’ is a term used to describe persons in two passages of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_127> iii. 4, 1, 7. 8;<br> xiii. 4, 2, 17.</ref> and in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_127> viii. 23.</ref> Weber<ref name=fx3_ve1_127> ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 199.</ref> also finds them mentioned in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx4_ve1_127> iii. 5, 7, where he emends ''rājānaḥ'' to ''[[अ-राजानः|a-rājānaḥ]]'' (see Whitney's note on the passage). ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveḍa,'' 333;<br> Weber, ''Über den [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]],'' 22 ''et seq.''</ref> and thinks that they--'''Sūtas''' (‘charioteers’) and '''Grāmaṇīs''' (‘troop-leaders’) there referred to--were called thus because, while not themselves princes, they assisted in the consecration of princes.

अराटकी
<u>'''Arāṭakī'''</u> is a plant mentioned once in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_128> iv. 37, 6. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 68;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 408.</ref> and apparently identical with the '''[[अजशृङ्गी|Ajaśṛṅgī]].''' ''Cf.'' also '''[[अरटु|Araṭu]].'''

अराड दात्रेय शौनक
<u>'''Arāḍa [[दात्रेय|Dātreya]] Śaunaka.'''</u>--He is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_129> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 384.</ref> as the pupil of '''[[दृति ऐन्द्रोत|Dṛti Aindrota]] [[शौनक|Śaunaka]].'''

अरित्र
<u>'''Aritra'''</u> denotes the ‘oar’ by which boats were propelled. The Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_130> i. 116, 5.</ref> and the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_130> xxi. 7.</ref> speak of a vessel with a hundred oars, and a boat (''nau'') is said to be ‘propelled by oars’ (''[[अरित्र|aritra]]-paraṇa'').<ref name=fx3_ve1_130> Rv. x. 101, 2. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 2, 5, 10.</ref> In two passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_130> i. 46, 8;<br> ''daśāritra,'' ii. 18, 1.</ref> the term, according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, denotes a part of a chariot. The rower of a boat is called ''aritṛ.''<ref name=fx5_ve1_130> Rv. ii. 42, 1;<br> ix. 95, 2. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 256.</ref> See '''Nau.''' 

अरिं-दम सन-श्रुत
<u>'''Ariṃ-dama Sana-śruta'''</u> is mentioned as a [[महाराज|Mahārāja]] in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 34.<br>==Foot Notes==

अरिम्-एजय
<u>'''Arim-ejaya'''</u> is mentioned as one who served as [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]] at the snake feast celebrated in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_132> xxv. 15. See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 35.</ref>

अरुण आट
<u>'''Aruṇa Āṭa'''</u> was Achāvāka at the snake feast in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xxv. 15).<br>==Foot Notes==

अरुण औपवेशि गौतम
<u>'''Aruṇa [[औपवेशि|Aupaveśi]] Gautama'''</u> is the full style<ref name=fx1_ve1_134> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 9, 2;<br> 4, 5, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 4, 10;<br> iii. 6, 4. 6;<br> 7, 4;<br> 8, 6;<br> 10, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxvi. 10.</ref> of a teacher, who is repeatedly referred to in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx2_ve1_134> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 5, 11;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 2, 20;<br> xi. 4, 1, 4;<br> 5, 3, 2.</ref> and Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx3_ve1_134> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 5, 3 (in both recensions).</ref> and whose son was the famous '''[[उद्दालक आरुणि|Uddālaka Āruṇi]].''' He was a pupil of Upaveśa,<ref name=fx4_ve1_134> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 6, 1, 2. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 146, n.^4</ref> and a contemporary of the prince '''[[अश्वपति|Aśvapati]],''' by whom he was instructed. ''Cf.'' '''Āruṇa.'''

अरुन्धती
<u>'''1. Arundhatī'''</u> is the name of a plant celebrated in several passages of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_135> iv. 12, 1;<br> v. 5, 5. 9;<br> vi. 59, 1. 2;<br> viii. 7, 6;<br> xix. 38, 1.</ref> as possessing healing properties in case of wounds, as a febrifuge, and as inducing cows to give milk. The plant was a climber which attached itself to trees like the '''[[प्लक्ष|Plakṣa]], [[अश्वत्थ|Aśvattha]], [[न्यग्रोध|Nyagrodha]],''' and '''[[पर्ण|Parṇa]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_135> Av. v. 5, 5.</ref> It was of golden colour (''[[हिरण्य|hiraṇya]]-varṇā''), and had a hairy stem (''lomaśavakṣaṇā'').<ref name=fx3_ve1_135> Av. v. 5, 7;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 174;<br> Bloomfield, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 574.</ref> It was also called [[सिलाची|Silācī]], and the '''[[लाक्षा|Lākṣā]]''' appears to have been a product of it.<ref name=fx4_ve1_135> ''Cf.'' Whitney's note on Av. iv. 12;<br> Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 61.</ref>

अरुन्धती
<u>'''2. Arundhatī,'''</u> as the name of a star, is often referred to in the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] literature, but only once in a late Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx1_ve1_136> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 9, 2.</ref> 

अर्क
<u>'''Arka,'''</u> as the name of the tree ''Colotropis gigantea,'' is perhaps found in one obscure passage of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_137> vi. 72, 1, where see Whitney's note. ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref>

अर्गल
<u>'''Argala.'''</u>--The word which is usual later to denote the wooden pin of a door is found in the Śāṇkhāyana Āraṇyaka (ii. 16) in the compound ''argaleṣīke'' to denote the pin and bar of the door of a cow-pen. ''Cf.'' '''[[इषीका|Iṣīkā]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अर्गल-काहोडि
<u>'''Argala-Kāhoḍi'''</u> is mentioned in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Samhitā (xxv. 7) as a teacher. The name may, however, be [[अर्यल|Aryala]], as suggested in the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' and as read by v. Schroeder in his edition. The Kapiṣṭhala (xxxix. 5) has Ayala. See below.<br>==Foot Notes==

अर्चन्त्
<u>'''Arcant'''</u> is possibly, as Ludwig<ref name=fx1_ve1_140> Translation of the Ṛigveda, 3, 133.</ref> thinks, the name of the author of a hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_140> x. 149, 5.</ref> ; but the word may be merely the ordinary participle ‘praising.’

अर्चनानस्
<u>'''Arcanānas.'''</u>--In one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_141> v. 64, 7.</ref> the gods MitraVaruṇa are besought to protect [[अर्चनानस्|Arcanānas]]. He is also invoked with '''[[श्यावाश्व|Śyāvāśva]]''' and several other ancestors enumerated in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_141> xviii. 3, 15.</ref> He appears as father of [[श्यावाश्व|Śyāvāśva]] in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_141> viii. 5, 9.</ref> The later tradition makes him play a part in the legend of his son's wedding, which Sieg<ref name=fx4_ve1_141> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 50 ''et seq. Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 127;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 354.</ref> endeavours to show is known to the Rigveda.

अर्चा
<u>'''Arcā.'''</u> See '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अर्जुनी
<u>'''Arjunī'''</u> is, in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_143> x. 85, 13.</ref> the name of the '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]]''' (‘lunar mansion’), elsewhere<ref name=fx2_ve1_143> Av. xiv. 1, 13. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 11, 2.</ref> called [[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]]. It occurs in the marriage hymn, with '''[[अघा|Aghā]]''' for '''[[मघा|Maghā]],''' and, like that word, is apparently a deliberate modification. 

अर्बुद
<u>'''Arbuda'''</u> is mentioned as Grāvastut priest at the snake festival described in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_144> xxv. 15.</ref> He is obviously the same mythical figure as [[अर्बुद|Arbuda]] Kādraveya, a seer spoken of in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_144> vi. 1.</ref> and [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx3_ve1_144> xxix. 1. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 3, 9.</ref> as a maker of Mantras.

अर्य
<u>'''Arya.'''</u>--This word is not common in the older literature, in places where the quantity of the first vowel is fixed as short, except in a mere adjectival sense. Geldner,<ref name=fx1_ve1_145> ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 96.</ref> indeed, contends that no other sense is anywhere needed; but Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_145> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> and Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve1_145> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 214, 215.</ref> agree in thinking that in several passages of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx4_ve1_145> xiv. 30;<br> xx. 17;<br> xxiii. 21;<br> xxvi. 2. ''Cf.'' also [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxviii. 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 19, 3. In Atharvaveda, xix. 32, 8, an analogous form occurs, as contrasted with ''[[ब्राह्मण|brāhmaṇa]], [[राजन्य|rājanya]],'' and ''[[शूद्र|śūdra]];<br>'' but even there Whitney renders it as ‘Āryan.’ ''Cf.'' xix. 62, 1;<br> Rv. viii. 94, 3;<br> Pischel, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 40, 125.</ref> the word has the same sense as '''[[आर्य|Ārya]],''' and this appears probable. Whether it is necessary to ascribe this sense to the word in the compound ''arya-[[पत्नी|patnī]]''<ref name=fx5_ve1_145> Rv. vii. 6, 5;<br> x. 43, 8.</ref> applied to the waters set free by Indra, is more doubtful. The commentator, Mahīdhara,<ref name=fx6_ve1_145> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 30.</ref> suggests that the word means a '''[[वैश्य|Vaiśya]],''' not an '''[[आर्य|Ārya]]''' generally. This view is supported by the explanation in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx7_ve1_145> xiii. 2, 9, 8. Contrast [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 4, 4 ''et seq.,'' where Arya appears to be taken in the wider sense.</ref> of one of the passages of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx8_ve1_145> xxiii. 30. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 212;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' x. 6;<br> Oldenberg, ''ṚgvedaNoten,'' 1, 126, 363.</ref> But though the use of Arya to denote a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] became common later, it is not clear that it was original.

अर्यम्णः पन्था
<u>'''Aryamṇaḥ Panthā,'''</u> ‘Aryaman's Way,’ an expression which occurs in the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx1_ve1_146> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 6, 6;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 12, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 1, 2.</ref> denotes, according to Weber,<ref name=fx2_ve1_146> ''Über den [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]],'' 48, 2.</ref> ‘the milky way,’ but, according to Hillebrandt,<ref name=fx3_ve1_146> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 79, 80.</ref> ‘the ecliptic.’ 

अर्यल
<u>'''Aryala.'''</u>--Those at whose snake feast the Gṛhapati was [[अर्यल|Aryala]], and the [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] was '''[[आरुणि|Āruṇi]]''' are mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xxiii. 1, 5). See also '''[[अर्गल|Argala]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अर्वन्त्
<u>'''Arvant.'''</u> See '''[[अश्व|Aśva]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अर्शस्
<u>'''Arśas'''</u> is the name of a disease mentioned in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_149> xii. 98.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 398;<br> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> with consumption and other ailments. It appears to designate ‘hæmorrhoids,’ as in the later medical literature.

अलज
<u>'''Alaja'''</u> designates some kind of bird--one of the victims in the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_150> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 4, 11, 1;<br> 5, 20, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 18;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxi. 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 34.</ref> or Horse Sacrifice.

अलजि
<u>'''Alaji'''</u> is the name of a disease in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_151> ix. 8, 20. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 390;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> The later ''alajī'' denotes an eye-disease--a discharge at the junction of the cornea and the sclerotica.

अलम्म पारिजानत
<u>'''Alamma Pārijānata'''</u> is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 4, 11; 10, 8) as a sage.<br>==Foot Notes==

अलसाला
<u>'''Alasālā.'''</u>--This word occurring only in one passage of the Atharvaveda (vi. 16, 4) is said to denote a grain-creeper.<br>==Foot Notes==

अलाण्डु
<u>'''Alāṇḍu.'''</u>--This is the reading in the text of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_154> ii. 31, 2.</ref> of the name of a species of worm. Bloomfield<ref name=fx2_ve1_154> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 315.</ref> shows reason to adopt the reading Algaṇḍu as the correct form of the word.

अलाबु
<u>'''Alābu.'''</u>--The bottle-gourd (''Lagenaria vulgaris''). Vessels made of it are referred to in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_155> viii. 10, 29. 30;<br> xx. 132, 1. 2. ''Cf. alāpu'' in Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 13.</ref>

अलाय्य
<u>'''Alāyya'''</u> is a word occurring in an obscure verse of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_156> ix. 67, 20.</ref> and appearing to be a proper name. Hillebrandt,<ref name=fx2_ve1_156> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 418.</ref> however, amends the text so as to remove the name. The St. Petersburg Dictionary suggests that it refers to Indra. Pischel<ref name=fx3_ve1_156> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 701.</ref> holds that  it is the name of a person whose axe was stolen, and for whom the hymn was written as a spell for the recovery of the axe.

अलिक्लव
<u>'''Aliklava'''</u> is a kind of carrion bird mentioned in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_157> xi. 2, 2;<br> 9, 9. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 88.</ref>

अलिन
<u>'''Alina'''</u> is the name of a people mentioned once only in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_158> vii. 18, 7.</ref> Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_158> ''Zur Litteratur und Geschichte des Weda,'' 95;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 126.</ref> thought that the Alinas were allies--possibly a subdivision--of the '''Tṛtsus.''' Ludwig<ref name=fx3_ve1_158> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 207.</ref> more probably thinks that they were defeated by '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]],''' together with the '''Pakthas, [[भलानस्|Bhalānas]], Śivas,''' and '''Viṣāṇins,''' with whom they are mentioned, at the '''[[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]];''' and Zimmer<ref name=fx4_ve1_158> ''Op. cit.,'' 431. The land is mentioned by Hiouen Thsang.</ref> suggests that they lived to the north-east of Kafiristan.

अलीकयु वाचस्-पत्य
<u>'''Alīkayu Vācas-patya'''</u> is twice mentioned as an authority in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xxvi. 5; xxviii. 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

अल्प-शयु
<u>'''Alpa-śayu'''</u> is a kind of insect mentioned in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_160> iv. 36, 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 408;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 210.</ref>

अवका
<u>'''Avakā'''</u> is an aquatic plant (''Blyxa octandra'') frequently referred to in the Atharvaveda as well as in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx2_ve1_161> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 6, 1, 1;<br> v. 4, 2, 1;<br> 4, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvii. 4;<br> xxv. 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 10, 1.</ref> and Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx3_ve1_161> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 5, 1, 11;<br> viii. 3, 2, 5;<br> ix. 1, 2, 20. 22;<br> xiii. 8, 3, 13.</ref> The Gandharvas are said to eat it.<ref name=fx4_ve1_161> Av. iv. 37, 8.</ref> Its later name is ''śaivala,'' and it is identical with the '''[[शीपाल|Śīpāla]].'''(**  1) viii. 7, 9; 37, 8-10.(**  5) With which it is glossed in Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 8; iv. 4. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Proceedings of the American Oriental Society,'' October, 1890, xli.-xliii.; ''American Journal of Philology,'' 11, 349; Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 71.

अवत
<u>'''Avata,'''</u> a word occurring several times in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_162> i. 55, 8;<br> 85, 10. 11;<br> 116, 9, 22;<br> 130, 2;<br> iv. 17, 16;<br> 50, 3;<br> viii. 49, 6;<br> 62, 6;<br> 72, 10, 12;<br> x. 25, 4;<br> 101, 5. 7. ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 26.</ref> denotes a well, artificially made (''khan'' ‘to dig’) in contrast with a spring  (''utsa''), though the latter expression is also applied to an artificial well. Such wells were covered by the makers,<ref name=fx2_ve1_162> Rv. i. 55, 8.</ref> and are described as unfailing (''a-kṣita'') and full of water.<ref name=fx3_ve1_162> Rv. x. 101, 6, etc.</ref> The water was raised by a wheel (''[[चक्र|cakra]]'') of stone, to which was fastened a strap (''[[वरत्रा|varatrā]]''), with a pail (''[[कोश|kośa]]'')<ref name=fx4_ve1_162> ''Aṃsatra-kośam,'' Rv. x. 101, 7, is best thus rendered. For the stone wheel (''aśma-[[चक्र|cakra]]'') which was above (''uccācakra''), see Rv. x. 101, 7;<br> viii. 72, 10. For the ''[[वरत्रा|varatrā]],'' see Rv. x. 101, 6. Perhaps ''kū-[[चक्र|cakra]]'' in Rv. x. 102, 11, is another name for the wheel, but ''cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> attached to it. When raised it was poured (''siñc'') into buckets (''[[आहाव|āhāva]]'') of wood.<ref name=fx5_ve1_162> Rv. x. 101, 6. 7.</ref> Sometimes those wells appear to have been used for irrigation purposes, the water being led off into broad channels (''sārmī suṣirā'').<ref name=fx6_ve1_162> Rv. viii. 69, 12. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 156, 157;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 14.</ref>

अवत्सार
<u>'''Avatsāra'''</u> is mentioned as a seer in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_163> v. 44. 10.</ref> as a priest in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_163> ii. 24.</ref> and as [[प्रास्रवण|Prāsravaṇa]] (or [[प्राश्रवण|Prāśravaṇa]]), son of [[प्रस्रवण|Prasravaṇa]], in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_163> xiii. 3.</ref> A hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_163> ix. 58. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 138;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 188;<br> 2, 315;<br> Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 62, ''et seq.''</ref> is incorrectly ascribed to him in the Anukramaṇī.

अ-वध्यता
<u>'''A-vadhyatā.'''</u> See '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अवस
<u>'''Avasa'''</u> in the adjective ''an-[[अवस|avasa]]'' in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_165> vi. 66, 7. ''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 372.</ref> may mean ‘drag.’

अव-स्कव
<u>'''Ava-skava.'''</u>--A kind of worm, mentioned along with others in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_166> ii. 31, 4. ''Cf.'' Whitney, ''ad loc.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 201;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 90;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 316.</ref>

अवात
<u>'''Avāta.'''</u> See '''[[वात|Vāta]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अवि
<u>'''Avi.'''</u>--‘Sheep’ are repeatedly mentioned in the Rigveda, and later, often in conjunction with goats (''aja''). The wolf (''[[वृक|vṛka]]'') was their great enemy,<ref name=fx1_ve1_168> Av. v. 8, 4;<br> Rv. viii. 34, 3;<br> 66, 8.</ref> and they were tended by shepherds.<ref name=fx2_ve1_168> ''Avi-pāla,'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 11;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 5, 2;<br> ''avi-pa,'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 9, 1.</ref>  Sheep as well as kine were captured from the enemy.<ref name=fx3_ve1_168> Rv. viii. 86, 2.</ref> The Soma sieve was made of sheep's wool, and is repeatedly referred to (''avi, meṣī, avya, avyaya'').<ref name=fx4_ve1_168> Rv. ix. 109, 16;<br> 36, 4, etc. See Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 203.</ref> Considerable herds must have existed, as [[ऋज्राश्व|Ṛjrāśva]] is said<ref name=fx5_ve1_168> Rv. i. 116, 17.</ref> to have slain one hundred rams, and in a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’)<ref name=fx6_ve1_168> Rv. viii. 67, 3.</ref> a hundred sheep are mentioned as a gift. The (''[[मेष|meṣa]],''<ref name=fx7_ve1_168> Rv. i. 43, 6;<br> 116, 16, etc.</ref> ''vṛṣṇi''<ref name=fx8_ve1_168> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 7, 4, etc.</ref> ) ram was sometimes castrated (''[[पेत्व|petva]]'').<ref name=fx9_ve1_168> Rv. vii. 18, 17;<br> Av. iv. 4, 8;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 22, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxix. 58;<br> 59.</ref> The main use of sheep was their wool; hence the expression ‘woolly’ (''[[ऊर्णावती|ūrṇāvatī]]'')<ref name=fx10_ve1_168> Rv. viii. 67, 3. ''Cf.'' x. 75, 8;<br> so ''[[उरा|urā]],'' x. 95, 3.</ref> is employed to designate a sheep. In the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx11_ve1_168> xiii. 50.</ref> the ram is described as ‘woolly,’ and as ‘the skin of beasts, quadruped and biped,’ with reference to the use of its wool as clothing for men and shelter for animals. Pūṣan is said<ref name=fx12_ve1_168> Rv. x. 26, 6.</ref> to weave raiment from the wool of sheep. Normally the sheep stayed out at pasture; in an obscure passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx13_ve1_168> x. 106, 5.</ref> reference appears to be made to rams in stall. [[गन्धार|Gandhāra]]<ref name=fx14_ve1_168> Rv. i. 126, 7.</ref> ewes were famous for their wool. Pischel<ref name=fx15_ve1_168> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 210.</ref> considers that the '''[[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]]'''<ref name=fx16_ve1_168> Rv. iv. 22, 2;<br> v. 52, 9.</ref> was named from its richness in sheep, ''[[परुस्|parus]]''<ref name=fx17_ve1_168> Rv. ix. 15, 6;<br> ''[[पर्वन्|parvan]],'' iv. 22, 2. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 229, 230;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 348.</ref> denoting the ‘flocks’ of wool.

अशनि
<u>'''Aśani.'''</u>--Zimmer<ref name=fx1_ve1_169> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 301.</ref> cites this word from the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_169> vi. 6, 5. ''Cf.'' 1, 121, 9.</ref> as denoting a sling stone, and compares a similar use of '''Adri.'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_169> i. 51, 3.</ref> In either case, however, the weapons are mythical, being used in descriptions of Indra's deeds. Schrader<ref name=fx4_ve1_169> ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 221.</ref> also cites ''aśan'' in this sense, but no Vedic passage requires this sense.

अश्म-गन्धा
<u>'''Aśma-gandhā'''</u> (‘rock-smell’) is a plant mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_170> xiii. 8, 1, 16, with Eggeling's note in the ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 427.</ref> probably identical with the late ''aśvagandhā,'' ‘horse-smell’ (''Physalis flexuosa''). 

अश्व
<u>'''Aśva'''</u> is the commonest word for ‘horse’ in the Vedic literature. The horse is also called ‘the runner’ (''atya''), ‘the swift’ (''[[अर्वन्त्|arvant]]''), ‘the strong,’ for pulling (''[[वाजिन्|vājin]]''), ‘the runner’ (''[[सप्ति|sapti]]''), and ‘the speeding’ (''haya''). The mare is termed ''aśvā, atyā, arvatī, vaḍavā,'' etc. Horses of various colour were known, dun (''[[हरित|harita]], hari''), ruddy (''aruṇa, aruṣa, [[पिशङ्ग|piśaṅga]], [[रोहित|rohita]]''), dark brown (''[[श्याव|śyāva]]''), white (''śveta''), etc. A white horse with black ears is mentioned in the Atharvaveda as of special value.<ref name=fx1_ve1_171> Av. v. 17, 15.</ref> Horses were highly prized,<ref name=fx2_ve1_171> Rv. i. 83, 1;<br> iv. 32, 17;<br> v. 4, 11;<br> viii. 78, 2, etc.</ref> and were not rare, as Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_171> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 35, 686.</ref> thought, for as many as four hundred mares are mentioned in one Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’).<ref name=fx4_ve1_171> Rv. viii. 55, 3. ''Cf.'' v. 33, 8;<br> vi. 47, 22-24;<br> 63, 10;<br> viii. 6, 47;<br> 46, 22, and Hopkins, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 15, 157.</ref> They were on occasion ornamented with pearls and gold.<ref name=fx5_ve1_171> Rv. x. 68, 11.</ref><br><br>Mares were preferred for drawing chariots because of their swiftness and sureness.<ref name=fx6_ve1_171> Pischel, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 35, 712714;<br> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 10, 305. ''Cf. ratho vadhūmān,'' Rv. i. 126, 3;<br> vii. 18, 22, ''vājinīvān,'' vii. 69, 1.</ref> They were also used for drawing carts, but were not ordinarily so employed.<ref name=fx7_ve1_171> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 4, 35.</ref> No mention is made of riding in battle, but for other purposes it was not unknown.<ref name=fx8_ve1_171> The Aśvins ride, Rv. v. 61, 1-3. An ''[[अश्व|aśva]]-sāda'' is referred to in Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 13;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 7, 1;<br> and riding is meant in Rv. i. 162, 17;<br> 163, 9. Av. xi. 10, 24. is doubtful. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 262;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 221. Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 230, denies the use;<br> but see p. 295, where it is admitted for ordinary purposes.</ref><br><br>Horses were often kept in stalls,<ref name=fx9_ve1_171> ''Cf.'' the epithet of richness, ‘filling the stalls with horses’ (''[[अश्व|aśva]]-pastya''), in Rv. ix. 86, 41, and see Av. vi. 77, 1;<br> xix. 55, 1.</ref> and fed there.<ref name=fx10_ve1_171> Av. ''loc. cit.''</ref> But they were also allowed to go out to grass,<ref name=fx11_ve1_171> Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 232, denies this, but it is the natural sense of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xv. 41.</ref> and were then hobbled.<ref name=fx12_ve1_171> The expression for this is ''[[पड्बीश|paḍbīśa]],'' Rv. i. 162, 14. 16;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 2, 13;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 1, 12;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, ix. 7. ''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 234-236.</ref> They were watered to cool them after racing.<ref name=fx13_ve1_171> Rv. ii. 13, 5;<br> 34, 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 11, 6;<br> Pischel, ''op. cit.,'' 1, 189, 190.</ref> Their attendants  are frequently referred to (''[[अश्व|aśva]]-pāla,''<ref name=fx14_ve1_171> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 4, 5.</ref> ''[[अश्व|aśva]]-pa,''<ref name=fx15_ve1_171> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 9, 1.</ref> ''[[अश्व-पति|aśva-pati]]'').<ref name=fx16_ve1_171> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 24;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 13.</ref> Stallions were frequently castrated (''vadhri'').<ref name=fx17_ve1_171> Rv. viii. 46, 30.</ref><br><br>Besides reins (''raśmayaḥ''), reference is made to halters (''aśvābhidhānī''),<ref name=fx18_ve1_171> Av. iv. 36, 10;<br> v. 14, 6;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 35;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 3, 1, 26;<br> xiii. 1, 2, 1.</ref> and whips (''aśvājani'').<ref name=fx19_ve1_171> Rv. v. 62, 7;<br> vi. 75, 13;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxix. 50.</ref> See also '''[[रथ|Ratha]].'''<br><br>Horses from the Indus were of special value,<ref name=fx20_ve1_171> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 2, 13;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, ix. 7;<br> ''vājinīvatī'' as epithet of [[सिन्धु|Sindhu]], Rv. x. 75, 8, of [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]], i. 3, 10;<br> ii. 41, 18;<br> vi. 61, 3. 4;<br> vii. 96, 3;<br> Pischel, ''op. cit.,'' i. 10. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 230-232.</ref> as also horses from the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]].'''

अश्व-तर
<u>'''Aśva-tara, [[अश्व|Aśva]]-tarī'''</u> are respectively the masculine and feminine name of ‘mule.’ These animals are mentioned frequently from the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_172> iv. 4, 8;<br> viii. 8, 22;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 47;<br> iv. 9;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 4, 1, 10, etc.;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 4.</ref> onwards. They were known not to be fruitful,<ref name=fx2_ve1_172> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 1, 2. 3. ''Cf.'' Adbhuta [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] in ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 40.</ref> and were probably considered inferior to horses,<ref name=fx3_ve1_172> As were asses, [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 2, 2;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 4, 4, 7.</ref> but a mule-car was quite common.<ref name=fx4_ve1_172> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 9;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 2, 1 (in both passages ''aśvatarī-[[रथ|ratha]]''). ''Cf.'' Oertel, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 175.</ref>

अश्व-त्थ
<u>'''1. Aśva-ttha'''</u> (‘horse-stand’) is one of India's greatest trees, the ''Ficus religiosa,'' later called ''[[पिप्पल|pippala]]''<ref name=fx1_ve1_173> The word ''[[पिप्पल|pippala]]'' as a neuter occurs once in the Rv. (i. 164, 20) designating the berry of the Peepal-tree.</ref> (now Peepal). Vessels made of the wood of the [[अश्वत्थ|Aśvattha]] are mentioned in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_173> i. 135, 8;<br> x. 97, 5.</ref> and the tree itself is constantly referred to later.<ref name=fx3_ve1_173> Atharvaveda, iii. 6, 1;<br> iv. 37, 4, etc.</ref> Its hard wood formed the upper of the two pieces of wood used for kindling fire, the lower being of '''[[शमी|Śamī]].'''<ref name=fx4_ve1_173> Av. vi. 11, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 1, 13.</ref> It planted its roots in shoots of other trees, especially the '''[[खदिर|Khadira]],''' and destroyed them;<ref name=fx5_ve1_173> Av. iii. 6.</ref> hence it is called ‘the destroyer’ (''vaibādha''). Its berries  are referred to as sweet, and as eaten by birds.<ref name=fx6_ve1_173> Rv. i. 164, 20. 22.</ref> The gods are said to sit under it in the third heaven.<ref name=fx7_ve1_173> Av. v. 4, 3. ''Cf.'' Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 5, 3;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 3.</ref> It and '''[[न्यग्रोध|Nyagrodha]]''' are styled the ‘crested ones’ (''śikhaṇḍin'').<ref name=fx8_ve1_173> Av. iv. 37, 4. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 57, 58.</ref>

अश्व-त्थ
<u>'''2. Aśva-ttha.'''</u>--This prince is celebrated in a Dānastuti<ref name=fx1_ve1_174> Rv. vi. 47, 24.</ref> as having given gifts to [[पायु|Pāyu]]. He is identified with '''Divodāsa''' by Griffith,<ref name=fx2_ve1_174> ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 611. The name is spelt Aśvatha in the text, but that is merely the usual shortened spelling of the group ''tth.''</ref> but it is impossible to be certain of this identification.

अश्व-दावन्
<u>'''Aśva-dāvan.'''</u>--Ludwig<ref name=fx1_ve1_175> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 274.</ref> finds a prince of this name in a passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_175> v. 18, 3.</ref> where a gift of fifty horses is mentioned, but the word appears to be an epithet of Indra (‘bestower of horses’).

अश्व-पति
<u>'''Aśva-pati'''</u> (‘lord of horses’) is a name of a prince of the '''Kekayas,''' who instructed '''Prācīnaśāla''' and other Brahmins.<ref name=fx1_ve1_176> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 11, 4;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 6, 1, 2.</ref>

अश्व-मेध
<u>'''Aśva-medha'''</u> (‘offering a horse-sacrifice’) is a prince mentioned in a hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_177> v. 27, 4-6. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 275.</ref> which contains a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’) of '''Tryaruṇa,''' and to which three verses have been added in praise of [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]]. See also '''Āśvamedha.'''

अश्व-युजौ
<u>'''Aśva-yujau.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अश्वल
<u>'''Aśvala,'''</u> the [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] priest of '''[[जनक|Janaka]],''' King of '''[[विदेह|Videha]],''' appears as an authority in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iii. 1, 2. 10).<br>==Foot Notes==

अश्व-वार
<u>'''Aśva-vāra, [[अश्व|Aśva]]-vāla'''</u> (‘hair of a horse's tail’).--The former form occurs in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve1_180> iii. 7, 9.</ref> the latter in the  [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_180> xxiv. 8.</ref> and Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitās<ref name=fx3_ve1_180> xxxviii. 1.</ref> and Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx4_ve1_180> iii. 4, 1, 7. ''Cf.'' Von Schroeder's edition of the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i., p. xv.</ref> denoting a species of reed (''Saccharum spontaneum'').

अश्व-सूक्ति
<u>'''Aśva-sūkti'''</u> is the name of a seer to whom the Rigveda Anukramaṇī ascribes two hymns of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_181> viii. 14;<br> 15.</ref> The [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_181> xix. 4, 10. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 230, n. 4.</ref> knows a Sāman of [[अश्वसूक्ति|Aśvasūkti]].

अश्विनी
<u>'''Aśvinī.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अषाढ कैशिन्
<u>'''Aṣāḍha Kaiśin'''</u> is the name of a man referred to in a corrupt and obscure passage of the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_183> xxvi. 9;<br> Kapiṣṭhala, xli. 7. See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 471.</ref> as connected with the defeat of the '''Pañcālas''' by the '''Kuntis.'''

अषाढ उत्तर पाराशर्य
<u>'''Aṣāḍha Uttara Pārāśarya'''</u> is mentioned as a teacher in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] or Genealogy in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 41, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

अषाढा
<u>'''Aṣāḍhā.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अषाढि सौश्रोमतेय
<u>'''Aṣāḍhi Sauśromateya'''</u> was a man who is stated in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vi. 2, 1, 37) to have died because the heads for the sacrifice in connection with the laying of the bricks of the fire-altar had been obtained in an improper manner.<br>==Foot Notes==

अष्टक
<u>'''Aṣṭaka'''</u> is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_187> vii. 17. Also in the Sāṅkhāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 26.</ref> as one of the sons of '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]].'''

अष्टका
<u>'''Aṣṭakā.'''</u> See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अष्ट-कर्णी
<u>'''Aṣṭa-karṇī'''</u> is an expression which occurs in one passage of the Ṛigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_189> x. 62, 7.</ref> and which Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_189> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> was at first inclined to interpret  as a proper name. There can, however, be no doubt that it means a cow, not a man, as suggested by Grassmann. The exact reason why a cow should be so described is uncertain. Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_189> ''Cf.'' Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> was later inclined to see in it the sense ‘having pierced ears,’ similar epithets being at a later period known to Pāṇini<ref name=fx4_ve1_189> vi. 3, 115.</ref> (''bhinna-karṇa, chinna-karṇa''). Grassmann's more obvious rendering, ‘having the sign for (the number) 8 marked on the ear,’ is supported by the similar epithets, ‘having the mark of a lute on the ear’ (''[[कर्करि|karkari]]-karṇyaḥ''), ‘having the mark of a sickle on the ear’ (''[[दात्र|dātra]]-karṇyaḥ''), ‘having the mark of a stake on the ear’ (''sthūṇākarṇyaḥ''), ‘having the ears bored’ (''chidra-karṇyaḥ''), and ''viṣtyakarṇyaḥ,'' given in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx5_ve1_189> iv. 2, 9.</ref> The simple meaning, ‘with marked ears,’ is, however, supported by the same passage of the Maitrāyaṇī, where the verb ''akṣ'' occurs in the sense ‘to mark.’ In the Atharvaveda the mark used is the Mithuna, no doubt as a magical device to secure fertility.<br><br>The marking of ears was apparently a regular practice. It is twice referred to in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx6_ve1_189> vi. 141, 1. 2;<br> xii. 4, 6.</ref> The mark is termed ''[[लक्ष्मन्|lakṣman]],''<ref name=fx7_ve1_189> Av. vi. 141, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> and was made with a copper-knife<ref name=fx8_ve1_189> Av., ''loc. cit.''</ref> (''[[लोहित|lohita]]''). The Maitrayaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx9_ve1_189> ''Loc. cit.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 234, 348;<br> Delbrück, ''Gurupūjākaumudī,'' 48, 49;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 466;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 387.</ref> forbids the use of an arrow-shaft (''[[तेजन|tejana]]''), or of iron, but permits that of a stem of sugar-cane (''[[इक्षु|ikṣu]]-kāṇḍa'') or copper.

अष्टा-दंष्ट्र वैरूप
<u>'''Aṣṭā-[[दंष्ट्र|daṃṣṭra]] Vairūpa.'''</u>--To him the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 9, 21) ascribes two Sāmans.<br>==Foot Notes==

अष्ट्रा
<u>'''Aṣṭrā'''</u> is the plougher's ‘goad,’ the badge of agriculture. It is mentioned several times in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_191> iv. 57, 4;<br> vi. 53, 9;<br> 58, 2;<br> ''[[अष्ट्रा|aṣṭrā]]-vin'' occurs in x. 102, 8. See also [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 80. ''Cf.'' Roscher, ''Archiv für Religionswissenschaft,'' 1, 63;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 364, n. 8.</ref>

असमाति राथ-प्रौष्ठ
<u>'''Asamāti Rātha-prauṣṭha.'''</u>--The story of the quarrel between Asamāti, the [[इक्ष्वाकु|Ikṣvāku]] prince of the [[रथप्रोष्ठ|Rathaproṣṭha]] family, and  his priests, the Gaupāyanas, is found only in the later Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve1_192> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 167 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 41 ''et seq.'');<br> Sāṭyāyanaka, cited in Sāyaṇa on Rv. x. 57, 1;<br> 60, 7;<br> Bṛhaddevatā, vii. 83 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 12, 5.</ref> It appears to be based on a misreading of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_192> x. 60, 2. 5;<br> Av. vi. 79, 1. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 499;<br> Max Müller, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1866, 426-465;<br> Bo7htlingk's Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 48, n. 1.</ref> where ''asamāti'' is merely an adjective. The later story is that the king was induced to abandon his family priests by two Asuras, [[किरात|Kirāta]] and [[आकुलि|Ākuli]], who by their magic compassed the death of [[सुबन्धु|Subandhu]], one of the brother priests, and that the others revived him by the use of the hymns (Rigveda, x. 57-60).

असि
<u>'''Asi'''</u> usually denotes the sacrificial knife,<ref name=fx1_ve1_193> Rv. i. 162, 20;<br> x. 79, 6;<br> 18;<br> Av. ix. 3, 9;<br> x. 1, 20, etc.</ref> but occasionally appears to mean a knife used in war.<ref name=fx2_ve1_193> Av. xi. 9, 1. The use of the ‘sword’ increases in the Epic period. See Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 284.</ref> Mention is made of a sheath (''vavri'')<ref name=fx3_ve1_193> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 4.</ref> to which a belt (''[[वाल|vāla]]'')<ref name=fx4_ve1_193> ''Ibid.;<br>'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 5.</ref> was attached. The word ''asi-[[धारा|dhārā]]''<ref name=fx5_ve1_193> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 139.</ref> also denotes ‘sheath.’

असिक्नी
<u>'''Asiknī'''</u> (‘black’) is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_194> viii. 20, 25;<br> x. 75, 5;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 26. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 12.</ref> of the river known later as [[चन्द्र|Candra]]-bhāgā, and to the Greeks as Akesines, now the Chenab in the Punjab.

असित
<u>'''1. Asita'''</u> is a name of the ‘black snake,’ referred to in the later Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve1_195> Av. iii. 27, 1;<br> v. 13, 5. 6;<br> vi. 56, 2, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 10, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 18;<br> perhaps Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 37.</ref>

असित
<u>'''2. Asita.'''</u>--(''a'') A mythical sage of this name figures as a magician in the Atharvaveda in conjunction with '''Gaya'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_196> Av. i. 14, 4.</ref> or with '''[[जमद्अग्नि|Jamadagni]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_196> Av. vi. 137, 1.</ref> In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_196> xiii. 4, 3, 11.</ref> he appears as  [[असित|Asita]] [[धान्व|Dhānva]],<ref name=fx4_ve1_196> Dhānvana in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 2, 19.</ref> and as [[दैवल|Daivala]] or [[देवल|Devala]] in the Pañcaviṃsa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_196> xiv. 11, 18. 19, ''Cf.'' xv. 5, 27.</ref> and [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx6_ve1_196> xxii. 11. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 132.</ref><br><br>(''b'') '''[[असित|Asita]] [[वार्ष-गण|Vārṣa-gaṇa]]''' is a pupil of '''[[हरित कश्यप|Harita Kaśyapa]]''' according to the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] or Genealogy in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1b_ve1_196/>

असित-मृग
<u>'''Asita-mṛga'''</u> is the designation in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_197> vii. 27. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 43, 345.</ref> of a family of the '''Kaśyapas''' who were excluded from a sacrifice by '''[[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]],''' but who took away the conduct of the offering from the '''Bhūtavīras,''' whom the king employed. In the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_197> i. 75.</ref> and the Ṣaḍviṃsa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_197> i. 4.</ref> the Asitamṛgas are called ‘sons of the Kaśyapas,’ and one is mentioned as '''Kusurubindu'''<ref name=fx4_ve1_197> Variously read as Asurbinda, Kusurbinda, Kusurubinda.</ref> '''[[औद्दालकि|Auddālaki]].'''

असुर-विद्या
<u>'''Asura-vidyā,'''</u> ‘the science of the Asuras,’ the term used in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] and Āśvalāyana<ref name=fx1_ve1_198> x. 7.</ref> Śrauta Sūtras as the equivalent of the term ''māyā'' employed in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_198> xiii. 4, 3, 11. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 61, 2. 21.</ref> clearly means ‘magic,’ as it is rendered by Professor Eggeling.<ref name=fx3_ve1_198> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 368.</ref>

अस्तृ
<u>'''Astṛ,'''</u> ‘shooter,’ is a term frequently used in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_199> i. 8, 4;<br> 64, 10;<br> ii. 42, 2, etc.</ref> and Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_199> vi. 93, 1. 2;<br> xi. 2, 7. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 296.</ref> for the archer who fought from the chariot.

अहन्
<u>'''Ahan,'''</u> ‘day.’ Like other peoples, the Indians used night as a general expression of time as well as day, but by no means predominantly.<ref name=fx1_ve1_200> Rv. iv. 16, 19;<br> viii. 26, 3;<br> i. 70, 4. ''Cf.'' Av. x. 7, 42.</ref> Night is also termed the dark (''[[कृष्ण|kṛṣṇa]]''), as  opposed to the light (''arjuna''), day.<ref name=fx2_ve1_200> Rv. vi. 9. 1.</ref> Aho-rātra<ref name=fx3_ve1_200> Rv. x. 190, 2;<br> Av. xiii. 3, 8, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 41, etc.</ref> is a regular term for ‘day and night’ combined.<br><br>The day itself is variously divided. In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_200> ix. 6, 45.</ref> a division into ‘the rising sun’ (''udyan sūryaḥ''), ‘the coming together of the cows’ (''[[सं-गव|saṃ-gava]]''), ‘midday’ (''[[मध्यं-दिन|madhyaṃ-dina]]''), ‘afternoon’ (''aparāhṇa''), and ‘sunset’ (''astaṃ-yan'') is found. In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_200> i. 5, 3, 1;<br> 4, 9, 2.</ref> the same series appears with ‘early’ (''[[प्रातर्|prātar]]'') and ‘evening’ (''sāyāhna'') substituted for the first and last members, while a shorter list gives ''[[प्रातर्|prātar]], [[संगव|saṃgava]], sāyam.'' In the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx6_ve1_200> iv. 2, 11.</ref> there is the series ‘dawn’ ''(uṣas), [[संगव|saṃgava]], [[मध्यंदिन|madhyaṃdina]],'' and ''aparāhṇa.''<br><br>The morning is also, according to Zimmer, called ''[[अपि-शर्वर|api-śarvara]],''<ref name=fx7_ve1_200> Rv. iii. 9, 7;<br> ''cf.'' Oldenberg, ''ṚgvedaNoten,'' 1, 230.</ref> as the time when the dark is just past. It is named ''[[स्वसर|svasara]],''<ref name=fx8_ve1_200> Rv. ii. 34, 8;<br> ix. 94, 2.</ref> as the time when the cows are feeding, before the first milking at the ''[[संगव|saṃgava]],'' or when the birds are awakening.<ref name=fx9_ve1_200> Rv. ii. 19, 2;<br> 34, 5.</ref> It is also called ''[[प्र-पित्व|pra-pitva]],''<ref name=fx10_ve1_200> Rv. vii. 41, 4;<br> viii. 1, 29. Sieg. ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 127 ''et seq.,'' interprets ''paritakmyāyām'' (Rv. i. 116, 15) similarly.</ref> according to Zimmer.<ref name=fx11_ve1_200> ''Altindisches Leben.'' 362.</ref> But Geldner<ref name=fx12_ve1_200> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 155-179.</ref> points out that that term refers to the late midday, which also is called ''[[अपि-शर्वर|api-śarvara]],'' as bordering on the coming night, being the time when day is hastening to its close, as in a race. From another point of view, evening is called ''[[अभि-पित्व|abhi-pitva]],''<ref name=fx13_ve1_200> Rv. i. 126, 3;<br> iv. 34, 5.</ref> the time when all come to rest. Or again, morning and evening are denoted as the dawning of the sun (''uditā sūryasya''), or its setting (''[[नि-म्रुच्|ni-mruc]]''). The midday is regularly ''madhyam ahnām,''<ref name=fx14_ve1_200> Rv. vii. 41, 4.</ref> ''madhye,''<ref name=fx15_ve1_200> Rv. viii. 27, 20.</ref> or ''[[मध्यंदिन|madhyaṃdina]]. [[संगव|Saṃgava]]''<ref name=fx16_ve1_200> ''Cf.'' Rv. v. 76, 3 (''saṃgave, [[प्रातर्|prātar]] ahno, madhyaṃdine'');<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 1, 3;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 12, 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 18, 14;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 112, 113. Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 362, places it too early--before the cows are driven out.</ref> is the forenoon, between the early morning (''[[प्रातर्|prātar]]'') and midday (''[[मध्यंदिन|madhyaṃdina]]'').<br><br>The divisions of time less than the day are seldom precisely given. In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx17_ve1_200> xii. 3, 2, 5. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 10, 1, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> however, a day and  night make up 30 ''muhūrtas;'' 1 ''[[मुहूर्त|muhūrta]]'' = 15 ''kṣipra;'' 1 ''kṣipra'' = 15 ''etarhi;'' 1 ''etarhi'' = 15 ''idāni;'' 1 ''idāni'' = 15 breathings; 1 breathing = 1 spiration; 1 spiration = 1 twinkling (''nimeṣa''), etc. In the Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx18_ve1_200> vii. 20. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiv. 78 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 92-95.</ref> the series is ''dhvaṃsayo, nimeṣāḥ, kāṣṭhāḥ, kalāḥ, kṣanā, muhūrtā, ahorātrāḥ.'' A thirtyfold division of day as well as of night is seen in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx19_ve1_200> Rv. i. 123, 8.</ref> by Zimmer, who compares the Babylonian sixtyfold division of the day and night. But the expression used-thirty Yojanas--is too vague and obscure--Bergaigne<ref name=fx20_ve1_200> ''Religion Védique.'' 3, 283 ''et seq. Cf.'' Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. kratu.''</ref> refers it to the firmament--to build any theory upon with safety.<br><br>The longer divisions of time are regularly ‘half month’ (''ardha-[[मास|māsa]]''), ‘month’ (''[[मास|māsa]]''), ‘season’ (''[[ऋतु|ṛtu]]''), and ‘year’ (''[[संवत्सर|saṃvatsara]]''), which often<ref name=fx21_ve1_200> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 15;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 12, 7;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 28;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, vii. 20;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]. iii. 8, 9, etc. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 361-363.</ref> occur in this sequence after ''ahorātrāṇi'' (‘days and nights’).

अहल्या मैत्रेयी
<u>'''Ahalyā Maitreyī'''</u> is practically a mythical name, the existence of the lady whose story is alluded to in several Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve1_201> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 4, 18;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 79;<br> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1.</ref> being derived from the epithet of Indra, ‘lover of Ahalyā’ (''ahalyāyai [[जार|jāra]]'').

अहि
<u>'''Ahi.'''</u>--This word occurs frequently from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_202> vii. 104, 7, etc. The word ''[[सर्प|sarpa]],'' which is usual in the Atharvaveda, occurs only once (x. 16, 6) in the Rv.</ref> onwards to denote ‘snake.’ Reference is several times<ref name=fx2_ve1_202> Rv. ix. 86, 44;<br> Av. i. 27;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 2, 6, 13;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 4, 10;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 9. ii. 139;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 6;<br> 17.</ref> made to its casting its slough. Mention is also made of the serpent's peculiar movement,<ref name=fx3_ve1_202> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 1, 4.</ref> which earns for it the designation<ref name=fx4_ve1_202> Av. iv. 3, 2.</ref> of ‘the toothed rope’ (''datvatī rajjuḥ''). The poisonous character  of its bite is spoken of,<ref name=fx5_ve1_202> Rv. vii. 104. 7;<br> Av. x. 4, 4 ''et seq.;<br>'' 6, 56.</ref> as well as the torpidity of the reptile in winter, when it creeps into the earth.<ref name=fx6_ve1_202> Av. xii. 1, 46.</ref> The cast skin is used as an amulet against highwaymen.<ref name=fx7_ve1_202> Av. i. 27.</ref> Mention is made of a mythical horse, [[पैद्व|Paidva]], which the Aśvins gave to Pedu as a protection against snakes,<ref name=fx8_ve1_202> Rv. i. 117-119</ref> and which is invoked as a destroyer of serpents.<ref name=fx9_ve1_202> Av. x. 4, 6. 10.</ref> The ichneumon (''[[नकुल|nakula]]'') is regarded as their deadly enemy, and as immune against their poison through the use of a healing plant,<ref name=fx10_ve1_202> Av. vi. 139, 5;<br> viii. 7, 23.</ref> while men kill them with sticks<ref name=fx11_ve1_202> Av. x. 4, 9.</ref> or strike off their heads.<ref name=fx12_ve1_202> Av. vi. 67, 2. See Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 94, 95.</ref><br><br>Many species of snakes are mentioned: see '''[[अघाश्व|Aghāśva]], [[अजगर|Ajagara]], [[असित|Asita]], [[कङ्कपर्वन्|Kaṅkaparvan]], [[करिक्रत|Karikrata]], [[कल्माषग्रीव|Kalmāṣagrīva]], [[कसर्णील|Kasarṇīla]], [[कुम्भीनस|Kumbhīnasa]], [[तिरश्चराजि|Tiraścarāji]], [[तैमात|Taimāta]], [[दर्वि|Darvi]], [[दशोनसि|Daśonasi]], [[पुष्करसाद|Puṣkarasāda]], [[पृदाकु|Pṛdāku]], [[लोहिताहि|Lohitāhi]], [[शर्कोट|Śarkoṭa]], [[श्वित्र|Śvitra]], [[सर्प|Sarpa]].'''

अहीना आश्वत्थ्य
<u>'''Ahīnā Āśvatthya'''</u> was a sage (''muni'') who achieved immortality by knowledge of a certain rite (''sāvitram'').<ref name=fx1_ve1_203> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 10, 9, 10. The form of the first name is remarkable. The second may be compared with '''[[अश्वत्थ|Aśvattha]].'''</ref>

आकुलि
<u>'''Ākuli.'''</u>--This mythical priest plays, together with '''[[किरात|Kirāta]],''' a part in the later tale of '''Asamāti''' and the '''Gaupāyanas.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

आक्ताक्ष्य
<u>'''Āktākṣya'''</u> is mentioned as a teacher who had peculiar views on the fire ritual (''agni-citi''), which are rejected in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_205> vi. 1, 2, 24. ''Cf.'' Lévi, ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 140.</ref>

आ-क्रमण
<u>'''Ā-kramaṇa.'''</u>--In the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]^1 (i. 3) this word is used with the specific sense of ‘steps to climb trees.’ <br>==Foot Notes==

आखु
<u>'''Ākhu.'''</u>--The exact sense of this word is uncertain. Zimmer<ref name=fx1_ve1_207> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 84, 85, followed by Bloomfield. ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 142.</ref> renders it ‘mole,’ while Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_207> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' followed by Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 317, 318.</ref> prefers ‘mouse’ or ‘rat.’ It is frequently mentioned in the later Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx3_ve1_207> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 14, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14. 7;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 57;<br> xxiv. 26;<br> 28;<br> Av. vi. 50, 1.</ref> and is known to the Rigveda,<ref name=fx4_ve1_207> ix. 67, 30.</ref> where, however, the word is regarded by Pischel<ref name=fx5_ve1_207> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 246;<br> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 701.</ref> as having acquired the secondary sense of ‘thief.’ This is denied by Hillebrandt.<ref name=fx6_ve1_207> ''Zeitschrift,'' 48, 418;<br> ''Vedainterpretation,'' 7.</ref>

आ-ख्यान
<u>'''Ā-khyāna.'''</u>--In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_208> vii. 18, 10. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 27.</ref> we hear of the Śaunaḥśepa [[आख्यान|Ākhyāna]], ‘the story of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]],'''’ which is told by the [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] priest at the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]] (‘royal inauguration’). The series of stories<ref name=fx2_ve1_208> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. xiii. 4, 3, 2. 15.</ref> used at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) during the year while the sacrificial horse is allowed to wander at its will is called the ‘cyclic’ (''pari-plavam''). The [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_208> iii. 25, 1.</ref> mentions also [[आख्यान|Ākhyāna]]-vids (‘men versed in tales’), who tell the Sauparṇa legend, elswhere<ref name=fx4_ve1_208> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 6. 2. 7.</ref> known as a '''[[व्याख्यान|Vyākhyāna]].''' [[यास्क|Yāska]], in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx5_ve1_208> v. 21;<br> vii. 7.</ref> frequently uses the term, sometimes in a pregnant sense as denoting the doctrine of the Aitihāsikas or traditional interpreters of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx6_ve1_208> xi. 19;<br> 25.<br><br>''Cf.'' Sieg. ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]].'' 16 ''et seq.''</ref>

आ-ख्यायिका
<u>'''Ā-khyāyikā.'''</u>--This word occurs apparently but once in the Vedic literature, in the late [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx1_ve1_209> i. 6. 3. ''Cf.'' Sieg. ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 20, n.</ref> where its significance is doubtful.

आगस्त्य
<u>'''Āgastya'''</u> appears as a teacher in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] (iii. 1, 1) and [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] (vii. 2) Āraṇyakas. <br>==Foot Notes==

आग्नि-वेशि शत्रि
<u>'''Āgni-veśi Śatri.'''</u>--A prince of this name appears to be referred to in a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’) in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_211> v. 34, 9. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 155.</ref>

आग्नि-वेश्य
<u>'''Āgni-veśya.'''</u>--Several teachers of this name are mentioned in the Vaṃśas or Genealogies of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]. In the Mādhyandina recension<ref name=fx1_ve1_212> ii. 5, 21;<br> iv. 5, 27.</ref> [[आग्निवेश्य|Āgniveśya]] is a pupil of '''[[सैतव|Saitava]].''' In the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension he is a pupil of '''[[शाण्डिल्य|Śāṇḍilya]]''' and '''[[आनभिम्लात|Ānabhimlāta]]''' in one [[वंश|Vaṃśa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_212> ii. 6, 2.</ref> and of '''[[गार्ग्य|Gārgya]]''' in the second [[वंश|Vaṃśa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_212> iv. 6, 2.</ref>

आ-घाटि
<u>'''Ā-ghāṭi'''</u> is a musical instrument, the ‘cymbal,’ used to accompany dancing. It is known to the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_213> x. 146, 2.</ref> and Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_213> iv. 37, 4 (''āgkāṭa''). ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 289.</ref>

आङ्गिरस
<u>'''Āṅgirasa'''</u> is a title denoting a claim to be of the family of '''[[अङ्गिरस्|Aṅgiras]],''' borne by many sages and teachers, like '''[[कृष्ण|Kṛṣṇa]], [[आजीगर्ति|Ājīgarti]], [[च्यवन|Cyavana]], Ayāsya, [[संवर्त|Saṃvarta]], Sudhanvan,''' etc.<br>==Foot Notes==

आज-केशिन्
<u>'''Āja-keśin'''</u> is the name of a family in which, according to the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 9, 3), '''Baka''' used violence against Indra.<br>==Foot Notes==

आजनि
<u>'''Ājani.'''</u>--This word is used to denote a ‘goad’ in the Atharvaveda (iii. 25, 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

आजात-शत्रव
<u>'''Ājāta-śatrava.'''</u> See '''Bhadrasena.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

आजि
<u>'''Āji'''</u> is constantly used in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_218> v. 37, 7;<br> vi. 24, 6, etc.</ref> and the later literature to express the sense of ‘a race,’ and only seldom denotes ‘a battle.’ '''Horse'''-racing was one of the favourite amusements of the '''Vedic''' Indian,<ref name=fx2_ve1_218> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 291;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 120;<br> 2. 1 ''seq.''</ref> the other being dicing  ('''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]]'''). The racecourse, called [[काष्ठा|Kāṣṭhā]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_218> Rv. viii. 80, 8;<br> Av. ii. 14, 6.</ref> or [[आजि|Āji]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_218> Rv. iv. 24, 8;<br> Av. xiii. 2, 4.</ref> itself, appears from the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx5_ve1_218> ii. 14, 6;<br> xiii. 2, 4.</ref> to have been a quasi-circular one to a mark (''[[कार्ष्मन्|kārṣman]]''<ref name=fx6_ve1_218> Rv. ix. 36, 1;<br> 74, 8.</ref> ) and back again. In the Rigveda the course is described as broad (''urvī'') and the distance as measured out (''apāvṛktā aratnayaḥ'').<ref name=fx7_ve1_218> The sense is doubtful in Rv. viii. 80, 8. Zimmer suggests that it may mean ‘the course is straight,’ without twistings, for which idea ''cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 160, quoting the comparison of the courser's race with a bowstring (Rv. iii. 53, 24). It is also rendered ‘the barriers are removed.’</ref> Prizes (''[[धन|dhana]]'') were offered (''dhā''),<ref name=fx8_ve1_218> Rv. i. 81, 3;<br> 116, 15;<br> vi. 45, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' viii. 80, 8;<br> ix. 53, 2;<br> 109, 10. According to Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 120, n. 2, ''[[धन|dhana]]'' is from ''dhan,'' ‘start.’ ''Cf.'' Pischel, ''ibid.,'' 171. ''Cf. dhanasā,'' Rv. i. 112, 7. 10;<br> ii. 10, 6;<br> viii. 3, 15, etc.</ref> and eagerly competed for. Other words for victory and the prize are ''kāra''<ref name=fx9_ve1_218> Rv. v. 29, 8;<br> ix. 14, 1.</ref> and ''bhara;''<ref name=fx10_ve1_218> Rv. v. 29, 8;<br> ix. 16, 5, etc.</ref> and to ‘run a race’ is described by the expressions ''ājim aj, i, dhāv, sṛ.''<ref name=fx11_ve1_218> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 25;<br> iv. 27;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 3, 4;<br> v. 1, 1, 3;<br> 4, 1;<br> vi. 1, 2, 12;<br> vii. 1, 2, 1, etc.</ref> The person who instituted a race is referred to as ''[[आजि|āji]]-sṛt,''<ref name=fx12_ve1_218> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, 5, 10. 28;<br> xi. 1, 2, 13.</ref> and Indra is called ''[[आजि|āji]]-kṛt''<ref name=fx13_ve1_218> Rv. viii. 53, 6.</ref> (‘race-maker’), and ''[[आजि|āji]]-pati''<ref name=fx14_ve1_218> ''Ibid.,'' 14.</ref> (‘lord of the race’).<br><br>The swift steeds (''[[वाजिन्|vājin]], atya'') used for the races were often washed and adorned.<ref name=fx15_ve1_218> Rv. ii. 34, 3;<br> ix. 109, 10;<br> x. 68, 11.</ref> According to Pischel<ref name=fx16_ve1_218> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 171-173. ''Cf.'' Sieg. ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 127 ''et seq.''</ref> the name of one swift mare is preserved--viz., [[विश्पला|Viśpalā]],<ref name=fx17_ve1_218> Rv. i. 116, 15. Pischel finds here a race in honour of Vivasvant, but his equation of [[खेल|Khela]] and Vivasvant is denied even by Sieg, who accepts his theory of [[विश्पला|Viśpalā]].</ref> whose broken leg was replaced by the Aśvins in a race; but the interpretation is very doubtful. Geldner<ref name=fx18_ve1_218> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> has also found a comic picture of a horse-chariot race in the [[मुद्गल|Mudgala]] hymn in the Rigveda, but Bloomfield<ref name=fx19_ve1_218> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 541 ''et seq.'' Von Schroeder, ''Mysterium und Mimus im Rigveda,'' 346 ''et seq.,'' follows Geldner. ''Cf.'' Winternitz. ''Vienna Oriental Journal,'' 23, 137.</ref> has shown that that interpretation is unsound. Pischel<ref name=fx20_ve1_218> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 172.</ref> also seeks to show that races were run in honour of gods, but the evidence for the theory is inadequate.<ref name=fx21_ve1_218> Sieg, ''op. cit.,'' 128.</ref>  A formal race, however, is a feature of the ritual of the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]] or royal consecration.<ref name=fx22_ve1_218> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 15;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 9;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 19 ''et seq.;<br>'' Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 2;<br> 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1. 43.</ref>

आजीगर्ति
<u>'''Ājīgarti.'''</u>--See '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]],''' who bears this patronymic in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_219> vii. 17. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 11, 2.</ref> He is called an [[आङ्गिरस|Āṅgirasa]] in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve1_219> xix. 11.</ref>

आज्य
<u>'''Ājya.'''</u> See '''[[घृत|Ghṛta]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

आञ्जन
<u>'''Āñjana.'''</u>--A salve frequently referred to in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_221> iv. 9;<br> vi. 102, 3;<br> ix. 6, 11;<br> xix. 44.</ref> which came from Mount '''Trikakubh'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_221> Av. iv. 9, 9. 10;<br> xix. 44, 6.</ref> in the Himālaya, and was used to anoint the eyes.<ref name=fx3_ve1_221> ''Cf.'' Av. iv. 9, 1 (''akṣyam'');<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3. Hence the legend in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 1, 5;<br> ''cf.'' i. 2, 1, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, 6, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 3, 15;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iv. 3.</ref> The region of the '''[[यमुना|Yamunā]]'''<ref name=fx4_ve1_221> Av. iv. 9, 10.</ref> is also given as a possible place of origin, and the ointment is declared as potent to remove jaundice, '''[[यक्ष्म|Yakṣma]], [[जायान्य|Jāyānya]],''' and other diseases.<ref name=fx5_ve1_221> Av. xix. 44, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> A female ointment-maker is mentioned in the list of victims of the '''Puruṣamedha''' (‘human sacrifice’).<ref name=fx6_ve1_221> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 14 (''āñjanī-[[कारि|kāri]]'');<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 10, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 5, 69;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda'' 381 ''et seq.;<br> American Journal of Philology,'' 17, 405, 406;<br> Whitney Translation of the Atharvaveda, 159.</ref>

आटिकी
<u>'''Āṭikī'''</u> is the name of the wife of '''Uṣasti''' in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (i. 10, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

अट्णार
<u>'''Aṭṇāra.'''</u>--Patronymic of '''Para.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

आडम्बर
<u>'''Āḍambara'''</u> was a kind of ‘drum.’ A ‘drummer’ (''āḍambarāghāta'') is mentioned in the list of victims at the [[पुरुष|Puruṣa]]-[[मेध|medha]] (‘human sacrifice’) in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_224> xxx. 19. ''Cf.'' Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 4, 8, 1.</ref> 

आणि
<u>'''Āṇi.'''</u>--This word, which is found in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_225> i. 35, 6;<br> v. 43, 8.</ref> but rarely later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_225> In a [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 7. See Keith's edition, pp. 266, 267, and Vānī.</ref> appears to be best taken with Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_225> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> and Zimmer<ref name=fx4_ve1_225> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 247.</ref> as denoting the part of the axle of the chariot which is inserted into the nave of the wheel. Sāyaṇa renders it as lynch-pin, and this sense is accepted by Leumann,<ref name=fx5_ve1_225> ''Etymologisches Wo7rterbuch,'' 30.</ref> being apparently also found in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]].<ref name=fx6_ve1_225> vi. 32.</ref> In one place in the Rigveda<ref name=fx7_ve1_225> i. 63, 8. ''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 96.</ref> the word appears by synecdoche to denote the whole chariot, but the passage is, according to Geldner,<ref name=fx8_ve1_225> Geldner, ''ibid.,'' 1, 141, n. 3.</ref> completely obscure.

आण्डीक
<u>'''Āṇḍīka'''</u> (‘bearing eggs’) is a term found in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_226> iv. 34, 5;<br> v. 17, 16. In the first passage the Paippalāda version has ''[[पौण्डरीक|pauṇḍarīka]]'' in its place;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 207. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 70;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 138.</ref> denoting an edible plant, apparently with fruit or leaves of egg shape (''āṇḍa''), akin to the lotus.

आता
<u>'''Ātā.'''</u>--The framework of the door of a house appears to be denoted by the plural of this word in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_227> i. 56, 5;<br> 113, 14;<br> iii. 43, 6;<br> ix. 5, 5 (''ātaiḥ'').</ref> (though in all passages there it is used only by synecdoche of the doors of the sky), and in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve1_227> xxix. 5 ''(ātaiḥ). Cf. ātābhiḥ'' in [[दुर्ग|Durga]] on [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iv. 18.</ref> Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve1_227> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 154.</ref> compares the Latin ''antae,'' to which the word etymologically corresponds.<ref name=fx4_ve1_227> Brugmann, ''Grundriss,'' 1, 209;<br> 2, 214.</ref>

आति
<u>'''Āti,'''</u> an aquatic bird. The Apsarases in the legend of [[पुरूरवस्|Purūravas]] and Urvaśī appear to him like Ātis, probably swans.<ref name=fx1_ve1_228> Rv. x. 95, 9. ''Cf.'' Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 1, 4.</ref> The birds appear also in the list of animals in the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’),<ref name=fx2_ve1_228> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 13, 1;<br> Maītrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 18;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 34.</ref> where Mahīdhara<ref name=fx3_ve1_228> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> renders them as the  later Āḍī (''Turdus ginginianus''), and Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx4_ve1_228> On [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit. Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben;<br>'' 89.</ref> quotes a view, according to which the [[आति|Āti]] was the [[चाष|Cāṣa]], or blue jay (''Coracias indica'').

आतिथि-ग्व
<u>'''Ātithi-gva.'''</u>--Patronymic of '''[[इन्द्रोत|Indrota]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

आत्रेय
<u>'''Ātreya'''</u> is the patronymic of a pupil of [[माण्टि|Māṇṭi]] in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_230> ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 (in both versions).</ref> An [[आत्रेय|Ātreya]] appears as a [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of '''[[अङ्ग|Aṅga]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_230> viii. 22.</ref> An [[आत्रेय|Ātreya]] was regularly the priest in certain rites,<ref name=fx3_ve1_230> ''Ibid.,'' vii. 7;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 3, 4, 21;<br> Kātyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 2, 21 (''sadasaḥ purastāt'').</ref> and an Ātreyī occurs in an obscure passage in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_230> i. 4, 5, 13. ''Cf.'' Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref>

आत्रेयी-पुत्र
<u>'''Ātreyī-putra'''</u> is mentioned as a pupil of '''[[गौतमीपुत्र|Gautamīputra]]''' in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]], or Genealogy, in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 5, 2, in both versions).<br>==Foot Notes==

आथर्वण
<u>'''Ātharvaṇa,'''</u> a patronymic formed from the name of the mythic [[अथर्वन्|Atharvan]], is found normally in the plural neuter as a designation of the hymns of the Atharvans. This use appears in the late nineteenth book of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_232> xix. 23, 1.</ref> and in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_232> xii. 9, 10.</ref> In the singular the expression [[आथर्वण|Ātharvaṇa]] (Veda), though not occurring till the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_232> vii. 1, 2, 4;<br> 2, 1;<br> 7, 1.</ref> is earlier than the term ‘Atharvaveda,’ which is first found in the Sūtras.<ref name=fx4_ve1_232> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 2, 10, etc.</ref> In the [[निदान|Nidāna]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_232> ii. 12.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' xxv.;<br> ''Atharvaveda,'' 8 ''et seq.''</ref> Ātharvaṇikas, or ‘followers of the Atharvaveda,’ appear.<br><br>Specific but mainly mythical Ātharvaṇas are '''Kabandha, [[बृहद्दिव|Bṛhaddiva]], [[भिषज्|Bhiṣaj]], Dadhyaṅc,''' and '''Vicārin.''' 

आ-दर्श
<u>'''Ā-darśa,'''</u> ‘mirror,’ is a term found only in the Upaniṣads<ref name=fx1_ve1_233> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1, 9;<br> iii. 9, 15;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 7. 4;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 2;<br> 11.</ref> and Āraṇyakas.<ref name=fx2_ve1_233> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 4;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, viii. 7.</ref>

आदार
<u>'''Ādāra'''</u> was a kind of plant which was prescribed as a substitute for '''Soma.'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_234> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 5, 10, 4.</ref> It is identified in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_234> xiv. 1, 2, 12. ''Cf.'' Kāthaka Saṃhitā, xxiv. 3;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxv. 12, 19.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 276.</ref> with '''[[पूतीक|Pūtīka]].'''

आनन्द-ज चान्धनायन
<u>'''Ānanda-ja Cāndhanāyana'''</u> is mentioned as a pupil of '''[[शाम्ब|Śāmba]]''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_235> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref>

आनभि-म्लात
<u>'''Ānabhi-mlāta'''</u> is mentioned in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]], or Genealogy, in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_236> ii. 6, 2 (not in the Mādhyandina version).</ref> as a pupil of [[आनभिम्लात|Ānabhimlāta]].

आनव
<u>'''Ānava.'''</u> See '''Anu.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

आनूक
<u>'''Ānūka.'''</u>--Geldner<ref name=fx1_ve1_238> ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 94.</ref> thinks that in its solitary occurrence in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_238> v. 33, 9.</ref> this word means an ornament. Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_238> St. Petersburg Dictionary. ''s.v.''</ref> takes it adverbially, and so do Ludwig and Oldenberg.

आपया
<u>'''Āpayā'''</u> is the name of a river mentioned once only in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_239> iii. 23, 4.</ref> when it occurs between the '''[[दृषद्वती|Dṛṣadvatī]]''' and the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]].''' Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_239> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 200. But ''cf. ibid.,'' 4, 304.</ref> was inclined to identify it with the Āpagā as a name for the Ganges, but Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve1_239> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 18.</ref> correctly places it near the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]], either as the small tributary which flows past Thānesar or the modern Indramatī farther west, while Pischel<ref name=fx4_ve1_239> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 218.</ref> assigns it to '''[[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]],''' of which the [[आपया|Āpayā]] is mentioned as a famous river in the Mahābhārata.<ref name=fx5_ve1_239> Mahābhārata, iii. 83, 68.</ref> 

आबयु
<u>'''Ābayu'''</u> is apparently the name of a plant in the Atharvaveda;<ref name=fx1_ve1_240> vi. 16, 1.</ref> the mustard plant<ref name=fx2_ve1_240> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 465, following the indication of the use of the hymn in the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].</ref> may have been meant, but the sense is quite uncertain.<ref name=fx3_ve1_240> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 292;<br> Zimmer. ''Altindisches Leben,'' 72.</ref>

आभि-प्रतारिण
<u>'''Ābhi-pratāriṇa.'''</u>--Patronymic of '''Vṛddhadyumna.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

आ भूति त्वाष्ट्र
<u>'''Ā [[भूति|bhūti]] Tvāṣṭra'''</u> is mentioned in two Vaṃśas, or Genealogies, of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_242> ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 (in both recensions).</ref> as a pupil of '''Viśvarūpa [[त्वाष्ट्र|Tvāṣṭra]],''' both teachers being no doubt equally mythical.

आमलक
<u>'''Āmalaka'''</u> (neuter), a common word later, is found in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vii. 3, 1), denoting the Myrobalan fruit. ''Cf.'' '''[[अमला|Amalā]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

आमिक्षा
<u>'''Āmikṣā'''</u> designates a mess of clotted curds. It is not known to the Rigveda, but occurs in all the later Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve1_244> Av. x. 9, 13;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 5, 4;<br> iii. 3, 9, 2;<br> vi. 2, 5, 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 9;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 21;<br> 23, etc.</ref> Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx2_ve1_244> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 1, 7. 9;<br> iii. 3, 3, 2, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 8, 8;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 438 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 99, 101);<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 8, 5, etc.</ref> etc., and is associated with the [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx3_ve1_244> ''Loc. cit. Cf.'' [[मानव|Mānava]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 2, 40.</ref>

आम्ब
<u>'''Āmba'''</u> denotes in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_245> i. 8, 10, 1.</ref> and [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_245> xv. 5.</ref> Saṃhitās a grain, called '''[[नाम्ब|Nāmba]]''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_245> v. 3, 3, 8.</ref>

आम्बष्ठ्य
<u>'''Āmbaṣṭhya'''</u> is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 21) as a king, whose priest for the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]], or royal inauguration, was '''[[नारद|Nārada]].''' Presumably the name is local, meaning ‘King of  the Ambaṣṭhas,’ as interpreted in the St. Petersburg Dictionary. Later the term [[अम्बष्ठ|Ambaṣṭha]] denotes ‘a man of mingled [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] and [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] parentage by father and mother’ respectively.<br>==Foot Notes==

आ-यतन
<u>'''Ā-yatana.'''</u>--The general sense of ‘abode’ or ‘home’ appears to be limited in one passage of the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vii. 24, 2) to the sense of ‘holy place,’ ‘sanctuary,’ which is found in the epic.<br>==Foot Notes==

आयवस
<u>'''Āyavasa'''</u> is mentioned apparently as a king in a corrupt and unintelligible verse of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_248> i. 122, 15. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 206;<br> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref>

आयु
<u>'''Āyu'''</u> appears in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_249> i. 53, 10;<br> ii. 14, 7;<br> vi. 18, 3;<br> viii. 53, 2;<br> Bergaigne, ''Religion Védique,'' 1, 60.</ref> with '''[[कुत्स|Kutsa]]''' and '''[[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]]''' as having been defeated, with Indra's aid, by '''[[तूर्वयाण|Tūrvayāṇa]],''' who is believed by Pischel<ref name=fx2_ve1_249> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 71-75.</ref> to have been King of the '''Pakthas.''' Possibly he is elsewhere<ref name=fx3_ve1_249> Rv. x. 49, 5;<br> but the word is possibly not a proper name.</ref> referred to as victorious, by Indra's aid, over '''[[वेश|Veśa]].''' Elsewhere he is quite mythical.<ref name=fx4_ve1_249> ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' 100, 135, 140.</ref>

आयुत
<u>'''Āyuta.'''</u> See '''[[घृत|Ghṛta]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

आ-युध
<u>'''Ā-yudha,'''</u> ‘weapon,’ in its widest sense covers the whole of a Kṣatriya's warlike equipment, which in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_251> vii. 19, 2.</ref> is summed up as horse-chariot (''[[अश्व|aśva]]-[[रथ|ratha]]''), bow and arrows (''[[इषु|iṣu]]-dhanva''), and corselet (''[[कवच|kavaca]]''). As the bow and arrow (''[[इषु|iṣu]], [[धन्वन्|dhanvan]]'') were essential as the main weapons of the Vedic fighter, they are probably meant when [[आयुध|Āyudha]] is used specifically of weapons, as often from the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_251> i. 39, 2;<br> 61. 13;<br> 92, 1;<br> ii. 30, 9. etc.;<br> Av. vi. 133, 2, etc.</ref> onwards. The battle hymn in the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_251> vi. 75.</ref> confirms this view, as it presents to us the warrior armed with bow and arrow on his chariot, and clad in armour ('''[[वर्मन्|Varman]]'''), with a guard ('''[[हस्तघ्न|Hastaghna]]''') on the left arm to avoid the friction of the bow-string. The corselet was not a single solid piece of metal, but consisted of many pieces fitted together (''syūta'');<ref name=fx4_ve1_251> Rv. i. 31, 15.</ref> it may  have been made either of metal plates or, as is more likely, of some stiff material plated with metal. In addition the warrior wore a helmet ('''[[शिप्रा|Śiprā]]'''). There is no trace of the use of a shield, nor is there any clear record of the employment of greaves or other guard for the feet.<ref name=fx5_ve1_251> Grassmann saw greaves in ''vaṭūriṇā padā'' in Rv. i. 133, 2, but this is most improbable.</ref> Skill in the use of weapons is referred to in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx6_ve1_251> i. 92, 1. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 183;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 295.</ref><br><br>It is doubtful whether sling stones ('''Adri, [[अशनि|Aśani]]''') were in ordinary use. The hook (''aṅkuśa'')<ref name=fx7_ve1_251> Rv. viii. 17, 10;<br> x. 44, 9;<br> 134, 6;<br> Av. vi. 83, 3. ''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts.'' 5, 87.</ref> also is merely a divine weapon, and the axe (''[[स्वधिति|svadhiti]],''<ref name=fx8_ve1_251> Rv. v. 32, 10;<br> ix. 67, 30;<br> x. 43, 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 298301;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts.'' 5, 469-472;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 281 ''et seq.''</ref> ''[[वाशी|vāśī]], [[परशु|paraśu]]'') does not occur in mortal combats. For the use of the spear see '''[[ऋष्टि|Ṛṣṭi]], [[रम्भिणी|Rambhiṇī]], [[शक्ति|Śakti]], [[शरु|Śaru]];''' of the sword, '''Asi, [[कृति|Kṛti]].''' Neither weapon can be considered ordinary in warfare, nor was the club ('''[[वज्र|Vajra]]''') used. For the modes of warfare see '''[[संग्राम|Saṃgrāma]].'''

आयोगव
<u>'''Āyogava.--Marutta Āvi-kṣita,'''</u> the [[आयोगव|Āyogava]] king, is mentioned as a sacrificer in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_252> xiii. 5. 4, 6. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 9, 14-16.</ref> where also a [[गाथा|Gāthā]] (‘stanza’) celebrating his sacrifice is cited. ''Cf.'' '''[[अयोगू|Ayogū]].'''

आरङ्गर
<u>'''Āraṅgara'''</u> is one of the names of the bee found in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_253> x. 106, 10. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 97.</ref> Other names are '''[[सरह्|Sarah]]''' and '''[[भृङ्गा|Bhṛṅgā]].'''

आरा
<u>'''Ārā,'''</u> a word later<ref name=fx1_ve1_254> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 365. n. 1.</ref> known as an ‘awl’ or ‘gimlet,’ occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_254> vi. 53. 8.</ref> only to designate a weapon of Pūṣan, with whose pastoral character its later use for piercing leather is consistent. ''Cf.'' '''[[वाशी|Vāśī]].'''

आराढि
<u>'''Ārāḍhi.'''</u>--Patronymic of '''Saujāta.''' ''Cf.'' '''Arāḍa.''' <br>==Foot Notes==

आरुण औप-वेशि
<u>'''Āruṇa Aupa-veśi.'''</u>--So the manuscripts let us read the former word in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, but this is doubtless an error for '''Aruṇa.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

आरुणि
<u>'''Āruṇi'''</u> is the patronymic normally referring to '''Uddālaka,''' son of '''Aruṇa [[औपवेशि|Aupaveśi]].''' Uddālaka is probably also meant by [[आरुणि|Āruṇi]] Yaśasvin, who occurs as a teacher of the Subrahmaṇyā (a kind of recitation) in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_257> ii. 80.</ref> Āruṇis are referred to both in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_257> ii. 5, 1. ''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 204.</ref> and in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx3_ve1_257> xiii. 12.</ref> as well as in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx4_ve1_257> ii. 4. 1.</ref>

आरुणेय
<u>'''Āruṇeya.'''</u>--An epithet of '''[[श्वेतकेतु|Śvetaketu]],''' indicating his descent from '''[[उद्दालक आरुणि|Uddālaka Āruṇi]]''' and '''Aruṇa [[औपवेशि|Aupaveśi]].''' It is apparently confined to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_258> x. 3, 4, 1;<br> xi. 2, 7, 12;<br> 5, 4, 18;<br> 6, 2, 1;<br> xii. 2, 1, 9;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 2, 1.</ref> and Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_258> v. 3, 1;<br> vi. 1, 1.</ref> in which [[श्वेतकेतु|Śvetaketu]] plays a great part.

आर्क्ष
<u>'''Ārkṣa.'''</u>--Patronymic of '''Śrutarvan''' and of '''Āśvamedha.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

आर्जीक
<u>'''Ārjīka'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_260> Singular: Rv. viii. 7, 29;<br> ix. 113, 2. Plural: ix. 65, 23.</ref> and '''Ārjīkīya'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_260> Rv. viii. 64, 11.</ref> (masc.), '''Ārjīkīyā'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_260> Rv. x. 75, 5.</ref> (fem.).--The two masculine forms probably denote the people or land, while the feminine word designates the river of the land. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx4_ve1_260> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 126-137.</ref> locates the country in or near Kaśmir, as Arrian<ref name=fx5_ve1_260> Anabasis, v. 29, 4.</ref> mentions Arsaces, brother of Abhisares, who presumably took his name from his people, and Abhisāra bordered on Kaśmir. Pischel<ref name=fx6_ve1_260> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 209, 217.</ref> accepts [[आर्जीक|Ārjīka]] as designating a country, which he, however, thinks cannot be identified. But neither Roth<ref name=fx7_ve1_260> St. Petersburg Dictionary.</ref> nor Zimmer<ref name=fx8_ve1_260> ''Altindisches Leben.'' 12-14.</ref> recognizes the word as a proper name. On the other hand, all authorities agree in regarding Ārjīkīyā as the name of a  river. '''Roth'''<ref name=fx9_ve1_260> ''Op. cit., s.v. [[सुषोमा|suṣomā]].''</ref> does so in one passage<ref name=fx10_ve1_260> Rv. x. 75, 5.</ref> only, elsewhere seeing references to Soma vessels; but it seems necessary to treat the word alike in all passages containing it. Zimmer does not locate the river, and Pischel denies the possibility of its identification. Hillebrandt thinks it may have been the Upper Indus, or the '''[[वितस्ता|Vitastā]]''' (the Jhelum), or some other stream. Grassmann follows [[यास्क|Yāska]]<ref name=fx11_ve1_260> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 26.</ref> in identifying it with the the '''[[विपाश्|Vipāś]]''' (Beäs), but this is rendered improbable by the position of the name in the hymn in praise of rivers (''nadīstuti'').<ref name=fx12_ve1_260> Rv. x. 75.</ref> Brunnhofer<ref name=fx13_ve1_260> ''Iran und Turan,'' 52.<br><br>''Cf.'' Max Mūller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 398;<br> 399.</ref> identifies it with the Arghesan, a tributary of the Arghanab.

आर्जुनेय
<u>'''Ārjuneya.'''</u>--In the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_261> i. 112, 23;<br> iv. 26, 1;<br> vii. 19, 2;<br> viii. 1, 11.</ref> this name occurs as the patronymic of '''[[कौत्स|Kautsa]].'''

आर्तभागी-पुत्र
<u>'''Ārtabhāgī-putra'''</u> is mentioned as a pupil of '''[[शौङ्गी-पुत्र|Śauṅgī-putra]]''' in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] or Genealogy in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_262> vi. 5, 2 (also in the Mādhyandina version).</ref> Ārtabhāga is a patronymic of Jaratkārava in the same [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_262> iii. 2, 1, 13.</ref>

आर्तव
<u>'''Ārtava.'''</u>--This expression denotes a portion of the year consisting of more seasons than one. But it does not bear the exact sense of ‘half-year,’ as suggested by Zimmer.<ref name=fx1_ve1_263> ''Altindisches Leben.'' 374.</ref> This is shown by the fact that it occurs regularly in the plural, not in the dual. In the Atharvaveda it occurs between seasons and years (''[[हायन|hāyana]]''),<ref name=fx2_ve1_263> iii. 10, 9.</ref> but also in the combinations, ‘seasons, Ārtavas, months, years,;<ref name=fx3_ve1_263> iii. 10, 10.</ref> ‘half-months, months, Ārtavas, seasons’;<ref name=fx4_ve1_263> xi. 7, 20. ''Cf.'' xv. 6, 6;<br> 17, 6.</ref>  ‘seasons, Ārtavas, months, half-months, days and nights, day’;<ref name=fx5_ve1_263> xvi. 8, 18.</ref> and in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā ‘months, seasons, Ārtavas, the year,’<ref name=fx6_ve1_263> xxii. 28.</ref> or simply with the seasons.<ref name=fx7_ve1_263> Av. v. 28, 2. 13;<br> x. 6, 18;<br> 7, 5;<br> xi. 3, 17;<br> 6, 17;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 2, 6, 1, 3. [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i, 3. cited in this sense in the St. Petersburg Dictionary, is not so to be understood, as the word there is merely adjectival.</ref>

आर्त्नी
<u>'''Ārtnī'''</u> denotes the end of the bow to which the bow-string (''[[ज्या|jyā]]'') was attached.<ref name=fx1_ve1_264> Rv. vi. 75, 4;<br> Av. i. 1, 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 11;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 9, etc.</ref> The string was not normally kept fastened to both ends of the bow, but when an arrow was to be shot it was strung taut.<ref name=fx2_ve1_264> Rv. x. 166, 3. ''Cf.'' Av. vi. 42, 1.</ref> On the other hand, the legend of the death of Viṣṇu, told in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx3_ve1_264> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 5. 9.</ref> and Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx4_ve1_264> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 5. 6;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1, 1, 7 ''et seq.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 297, 298;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 270.</ref> expressly contemplates his leaning on his strung bow, which cleaves his head by the sudden springing apart of the two ends when the bow-string is gnawed through.

आर्य
<u>'''Ārya'''</u> is the normal designation in the Vedic literature from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_265> Rv. i. 51, 8;<br> 130, 8;<br> 156, 5, etc.</ref> onwards of an Āryan, a member of the three upper classes, '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]],''' or '''[[वैश्य|Vaiśya]],''' as the formal division is given in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_265> iv. 1, 6 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension).</ref> The [[आर्य|Ārya]] stands in opposition to the '''[[दास|Dāsa]],'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_265> Rv. i. 51, 8. 9;<br> 103, 3;<br> vi. 20, 10;<br> 25, 2, 3, etc. (opposed to [[दास|Dāsa]]);<br> Av. iv. 20, 4. 8;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 6, 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiv. 30, etc. (opposed to Sūdra).</ref> but also to the '''[[शूद्र|Śūdra]].''' Sometimes<ref name=fx4_ve1_265> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 205, 215, finds this use--understanding [[आर्य|Ārya]] as meant--in Atharvaveda, xix. 32, 8, and 62, 1, as well as in passages where Śūdrāryau is found. Lanman, in Whitney's Translation of the Atharvaveda, 948, 1003, quotes his view with approval;<br> but Whitney's version leaves no doubt that he read and understood the text as [[आर्य|Ārya]], the Āryan, not the [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]]. For Whitney's view, Av. iv. 20, 4. 8 may be cited;<br> and so Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' takes the passages. In [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 10, 8, Śūdrāryau must mean Sūdra and [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]];<br> but the Padapāṭha takes it as Arya, and so does Zimmer.</ref> the expression is restricted to the [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] caste,  the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] and the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] receiving special designations; but this use is not common, and it is often uncertain also whether '''Arya''' is not meant. The phrase Śūdrāryau<ref name=fx5_ve1_265> See [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 9, 3, with Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 3, 7. 8;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 5;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 17;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 6, 7;<br> Lāṭyāyana [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 2, 5;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvii. 6, 2;<br> Anupada [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vii. 10.</ref> is especially ambiguous, but appears to have denoted originally the [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] and the Āryan, for in the Mahāvrata ceremony the fight between a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] and an [[आर्य|Ārya]] is represented in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] as one between a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] and a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]], though the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] treats it as a fight between a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] and a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]].<br><br>The word [[आर्य|Ārya]] (fem. Āryā or Ārī) also occurs frequently used as an adjective to describe the Āryan classes (''viśaḥ''),<ref name=fx6_ve1_265> Rv. i. 77, 3;<br> 96, 31;<br> x. 11, 4;<br> 43, 4, etc.</ref> or name (''[[नामन्|nāman]]''),<ref name=fx7_ve1_265> Rv. x;<br> 49, 3.</ref> or caste (''[[वर्ण|varṇa]]''),<ref name=fx8_ve1_265> Rv. iii. 34, 9. ''Cf.'' '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]].'''</ref> or dwellings (''[[धामन्|dhāman]]'');<ref name=fx9_ve1_265> Rv. ix. 63, 14.</ref> or again reference is made to the Āryan supremacy (''[[व्रत|vrata]]'')<ref name=fx10_ve1_265> Rv. x. 65, 11. So Agni and Indra are styled Āryan, as supporters of the Āryan people (Rv. vi. 60, 6).</ref> being extended over the land. Āryan foes (''vṛtra'')<ref name=fx11_ve1_265> Rv. vi. 33, 3;<br> vii. 83, 1;<br> x. 69, 6.</ref> are referred to beside [[दास|Dāsa]] foes, and there are many<ref name=fx12_ve1_265> Rv. i. 102, 5;<br> iii. 32, 14;<br> vi. 22, 10;<br> 25, 2. 3;<br> viii. 2, 4. 27;<br> x. 38, 3;<br> 83, 1;<br> 102, 3, etc.</ref> references to war of Āryan versus Āryan, as well as to war of Āryan against [[दास|Dāsa]]. From this it can be fairly deduced that even by the time of the Rigveda the Āryan communities had advanced far beyond the stage of simple conquest of the aborigines. In the later Saṃhitās and Brāhmaṇas the wars alluded to seem mainly Āryan wars, no doubt in consequence of the fusion of [[आर्य|Ārya]] and [[दास|Dāsa]] into one community.<br><br>Weber<ref name=fx13_ve1_265> ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 288. ''Cf.'' Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. [[कृष्टि|kṛṣṭi]],'' and '''Pañca Janāsaḥ.'''</ref> considers that the five peoples known to the Rigveda were the Āryans and the four peoples of the quarters (''[[दिश्|diś]]'') of the earth, but this is doubtful. Āryan speech (''[[वाच्|vāc]]'')<ref name=fx14_ve1_265> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 5;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, viii. 9. ''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 196, 255;<br> and '''[[वाच्|Vāc]].'''<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 207 ''et seq.;<br>'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 214 ''et seq.''</ref> is specially referred to in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] and [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyakas. 

आर्य
<u>'''Ārya.'''</u> See '''[[माल्य|Mālya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अर्ष्टि-षेण
<u>'''Arṣṭi-ṣeṇa.'''</u>--Patronymic of '''Devāpi.'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_267> Rv. x. 98, 5. 6. 8;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 11;<br> Bṛhaddevatā, vii. 155.</ref>

आल
<u>'''Āla'''</u> appears to mean ‘weed’ in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_268> Av. vi. 16, 3. But Whitney takes the word as a verb, comparing v. 22, 6.</ref> and to form part of three other words,<ref name=fx2_ve1_268> Av. vi. 16, 4.</ref> denoting, according to Sāyaṇa, grass-creepers (''[[सस्य|sasya]]-vallī'')--viz., [[अलसाला|Alasālā]], Silañjālā,<ref name=fx3_ve1_268> Sāyaṇa reads Śalāñjālā, and the manuscripts of the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (vi. 16), have Śilāñjālā. But ''cf.'' '''[[सिलाची|Silācī]].'''</ref> and [[नीलागलसाल|Nīlāgalasāla]]. Whitney,<ref name=fx4_ve1_268> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 292, 293. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 466.</ref> however, does not think that the words can be given any determinate sense.

आलम्बायनी-पुत्र
<u>'''Ālambāyanī-putra'''</u> is mentioned in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] or Genealogy of the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 5, 2) as a pupil of '''[[आलम्बी-पुत्र|Ālambī-putra]].''' In the Mādhyandina recension (vi. 4, 32) the relation is reversed, for there he is teacher of [[आलम्बी-पुत्र|Ālambī-putra]] and pupil of '''[[जायन्ती-पुत्र|Jāyantī-putra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

आलम्बी-पुत्र
<u>'''Ālambī-putra'''</u> is a pupil of '''[[जायन्ती-पुत्र|Jāyantī-putra]]''' according to a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] in the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 5, 2), but of '''[[आलम्बायनी-पुत्र|Ālambāyanī-putra]]''' according to the Mādhyandina (vi. 4, 32).<br>==Foot Notes==

आलिगी
<u>'''Āligī'''</u> is the name of a kind of serpent in the Atharvaveda (v. 13, 7). ''Cf.'' '''[[विलिगी|Viligī]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

आ-वसथ
<u>'''Ā-vasatha'''</u> (‘dwelling’).--The precise sense<ref name=fx1_ve1_272> Av. ix. 6, 5 (a hymn in praise of entertaining Brāhmaṇas);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 10, 6;<br> iii. 7, 4, 6;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 4, 4, 6 (where Eggeling renders the word as if meaning ‘house’ merely);<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1, 1, etc. Details are given in the Sūtras--''e.g.,'' Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], v. 9, 3;<br> [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 9, 25, 4.</ref> of this term appears to be a place for the reception of guests, especially Brāhmaṇas and others on the occasion of feasts and sacrifices (somewhat like the modern meaning of [[धर्म|Dharma]]-[[शाला|śālā]] as a resthouse for pilgrims), a use derived from the more general sense of ‘abode.’<ref name=fx2_ve1_272> ''E.g.,'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 12. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 120, n. 1.</ref> 

आविक
<u>'''Āvika'''</u> (‘coming from the sheep,’ ''avi'') is a term for ‘wool,’ which occurs first in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (ii. 3, 6). ''Cf.'' '''Avi.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

अवि-क्षित
<u>'''Avi-kṣita.'''</u>--Patronymic of '''Marutta,'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_274> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 21;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 6.</ref> the '''[[आयोगव|Āyogava]].'''

आ-शरीक
<u>'''Ā-śarīka'''</u> appears to denote a disease in a hymn of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_275> xix. 34, 10.</ref> celebrating the powers of the '''Jaṅgida''' plant. Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve1_275> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 65, 391.</ref> thinks that it merely denotes the pain in the limbs accompanying fever. Whitney<ref name=fx3_ve1_275> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 953. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 673.</ref> suggests taking the word as merely an epithet.

आ-शिर्
<u>'''Ā-śir'''</u> (‘admixture’) denotes the mixing, and more especially the milk mixed with the juice, of the Soma before it was offered to the gods. In this sense it is not rare from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_276> i. 134, 6;<br> iii. 53, 14;<br> viii. 2, 10. 11, etc.;<br> Av. ii. 29, 1, etc.;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 8;<br> 32.</ref> onwards. Not milk alone was employed for this purpose. The epithet ‘having three admixtures’ applied to Soma<ref name=fx2_ve1_276> Rv. v. 27, 5;<br> ''cf.'' viii. 2, 7. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 209 ''et seq.''</ref> is explained by the other epithets, ‘mixed with milk’ (''[[गवाशिर्|gavāśir]]''), ‘mixed with curds’ (''[[दध्य्-आशिर्|dadhy-āśir]]''), and ‘mixed with grain’ (''[[यवाशिर्|yavāśir]]'')--all referring to Soma.

आशी-विष
<u>'''Āśī-viṣa,'''</u> occurring only in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_277> vi. 1.</ref> is understood by Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_277> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' It is a common word in the Epic and later.</ref> as designating a particular kind of snake, and perhaps means ‘having poison (''[[विष|viṣa]]'') in its fangs’ (''āśī'').

आशु
<u>'''Āśu,'''</u> the ‘swift,’ is frequently used without '''[[अश्व|Aśva]]''' to denote the chariot steed from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_278> ii. 16, 3;<br> 31, 2;<br> 38, 3, etc.;<br> Av. ii. 14, 6;<br> iv. 27, 1;<br> xiii. 2, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 10;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 3, 3, etc.</ref> onwards. 

आशुं-ग
<u>'''Āśuṃ-ga'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_279> vi. 14, 3.</ref> seems to denote some sort of animal. It is qualified by the word ‘young’ (''[[शिशुक|śiśuka]]''), and Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_279> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> suggests that it may mean a bird (‘swift-flying’), or that the expression denotes ‘a foal going to its dam’ (''[[आशु|āśu]]-ga''). Sāyaṇa, however, reads the accompanying word as ''[[शुशुक|śuśuka]],'' which he assumes to denote an animal. Bloomfield<ref name=fx3_ve1_279> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 464.<br><br>''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 291.</ref> renders the two words ‘a swift (''[[आशुंग|āśuṃga]]'') foal (''[[शिशुक|śiśuka]]''),’ thus agreeing with one of Roth's suggestions in sense, though not in the explanation of Aśuṃga.

आ-श्रम
<u>'''Ā-śrama'''</u> (‘resting-place’) does not occur in any [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] which can be regarded as pre-Buddhistic. Its earliest use as denoting the stages of a Hindu's life is found in the Śvetāśvatara [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_280> ''Atyāśramin,'' Śvetāśvatara [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 21;<br> Maitrāyaṇī [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 3, etc.</ref> In one passage<ref name=fx2_ve1_280> viii. 5.</ref> of the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] reference is made only to the '''Brahmacārin''' and householder, to whom, as a reward for study, the procreation of children, the practice of Yoga, abstention from injury to living creatures, and sacrifices, freedom from transmigration are promised. In another place<ref name=fx3_ve1_280> ii. 23, 1.</ref> three states are contemplated, but not as consecutive. The Brahmacārin may either become a householder or become an anchorite, or remain in his teacher's house all his life. Similarly, reference<ref name=fx4_ve1_280> v. 10.</ref> is made to the death of the anchorite in the forest, or the sacrifice in the village. In contrast with all three<ref name=fx5_ve1_280> ii. 23, 1.</ref> is the man who stands fast in [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] (Brahmasaṃstha). In the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx6_ve1_280> iv. 2, 22. ''Cf.'' iii. 5.</ref> the knower of the Ātman is contrasted with those who (1) study, or (2) sacrifice and give alms, or (3) are anchorites, and in another place<ref name=fx7_ve1_280> iii. 8, 10.</ref> with those who sacrifice and make benefactions, and those who practice asceticism. This position of superiority to, and distinction from, the Āśramas became later a fourth<ref name=fx8_ve1_280> [[जाबाल|Jābāla]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], 4. ''Cf.'' Muṇḍaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1, 7.</ref> [[आश्रम|Āśrama]],  the '''Gṛhastha,''' or householder, who was in the second stage, being required to pass not only into the stage of '''Vānaprastha,''' but also that of the Sannyāsin ('''[[भिक्षु|Bhikṣu]], [[परिव्राजक|Parivrājaka]]'''). The first stage, that of the '''Brahmacārin,''' was still obligatory, but was no longer allowed to remain a permanent one, as was originally possible.<br><br>''Cf.'' Deussen, ''Philosophy of the Upanishads,'' 60, 367 ''et seq.''

आ-श्रेषा
<u>'''Ā-śreṣā, Ā-śleṣā.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

आश्व-घ्न
<u>'''Āśva-ghna.'''</u>--This name occurs in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_282> x. 61, 21.</ref> in a very obscure hymn, where it appears to denote a prince who had made offerings to Indra, and who may, as Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_282> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 165.</ref> thinks, have been called '''Vitaraṇa.'''

अश्वतर आश्वि
<u>'''Aśvatara Āśvi,'''</u> or '''Āśvatarāśvi.'''--These two expressions are used<ref name=fx1_ve1_283> The first is found in [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 30;<br> the second in Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 6, 1, 9;<br> x. 6, 1, 1;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 15, 8;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 11, 1;<br> 16, 1.</ref> as patronymics of '''Buḍila,''' denoting, according to Sāyaṇa,<ref name=fx2_ve1_283> On [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> that he was son of [[अश्व|Aśva]], and descendant of [[अश्वतर|Aśvatara]].

अश्व-त्थ्य
<u>'''Aśva-tthya.'''</u>--Patronymic of Ahīnā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_284> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 10, 9, 10. Possibly to be read Āśvathya.</ref>

अश्व-मेध
<u>'''Aśva-medha'''</u> is the patronymic of an unnamed prince, who occurs in a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’) in the Rigveda (viii. 68, 15. 16).<br>==Foot Notes==

आश्व-वाल
<u>'''Āśva-vāla.'''</u>--From this adjective (‘made of horse-tail grass’), applied to a strew (''[[प्रस्तर|prastara]]'') in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 4, 1, 17; 6, 3, 10), follows the existence of the Aśvavāla grass (''Saccharum spontaneum'').<br>==Foot Notes==

आश्व-सूक्ति
<u>'''Āśva-sūkti'''</u> is mentioned in [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xix. 4, 2, ''et seq.'') as an author of Sāmans (Soma chants) along with '''Gausūkti.''' <br>==Foot Notes==

आश्विन
<u>'''Āśvina,'''</u> or '''Āśvīna,''' designates, in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_288> vi. 131, 3.</ref> and two Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx2_ve1_288> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 17;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] in ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 34.</ref> the length of journey made in a day by a horseman (''aśvin''). The exact distance is not defined. In the Atharva it appears to exceed five leagues, being mentioned immediately after a distance of three or five '''Yojanas;''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] the heavenly world is placed at a distance of a thousand '''Āśvinas.'''

आषाधि सौश्रोमतेय
<u>'''Āṣādhi Sauśromateya.'''</u>--According to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_289> vi. 2, 1, 37. Eggeling has Aṣāḍhi, but as it is a patronymic of Aṣāḍha, the form Āṣāḍhi seems correct.</ref> he was ruined because the heads were put on at the Agniciti in a certain manner, and not correctly.

आष्ट्रा
<u>'''Āṣṭrā'''</u> seems in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā (xxxvii. 1) to denote the ploughman's goad.<br>==Foot Notes==

आष्ट्री
<u>'''Āṣṭrī.'''</u>--In the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_291> x. 165, 3. ''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 347.</ref> the word seems to denote a fireplace. The evil bird is entreated not to settle there on the hearth.

आसङ्ग प्लायोगि
<u>'''Āsaṅga Plāyogi'''</u> is a king who appears in a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’) in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_292> viii. 1, 32. 33.</ref> as a generous patron. Owing, however, to the addition of a curious phallic verse to the hymn, and its early misunderstanding,<ref name=fx2_ve1_292> viii. 1, 34. See Hopkins, ''Religions of India,'' 150, n. 1;<br> Bṛhaddevatā, ii. 83;<br> vi. 41, with Macdonell's notes. Dyādvi. eda gives the tale at length in Vedic words taken from the Nighaṇṭu, a curious ''jeu d'esprit.'' See the extract from the Nītimañjarī given by Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 40, 41.</ref> a legend was invented that he lost his manhood and became a woman, but by the intercession of '''[[मेध्यातिथि|Medhyātithi]]''' was transformed into a man, much to the delight of his wife, '''[[शश्वती|Śaśvatī]],''' whose existence is based on a misunderstanding of the phrase ‘every woman’ (''[[शश्वती|śaśvatī]] [[नारी|nārī]]'') in the added verse.<ref name=fx3_ve1_292> viii. 1, 34.</ref> Another misunderstanding  of the Dānastuti<ref name=fx4_ve1_292> viii. 1, 31. 32. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 159;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 89;<br> Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 106, 107;<br> Oldenberg. ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 354.</ref> gives him a son [[स्वनद्-रथ|Svanad-ratha]], really a mere epithet, and makes him a descendant of Yadu.

आ-सन्दी
<u>'''Ā-sandī.'''</u>--This is a generic term for a seat of some sort, occurring frequently in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_293> Av. xiv. 2, 65;<br> xv. 3, 2 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 8, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, viii. 56;<br> xix. 16;<br> 86, etc.</ref> and Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve1_293> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 5;<br> 6;<br> 12;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 4, 26;<br> v. 2, 1, 22;<br> 4, 4, 1, etc.</ref> but not in the Rigveda. In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_293> xv. 3, 2 ''et seq.''</ref> the settle brought for the '''[[व्रात्य|Vrātya]]''' is described at length. It had two feet, lengths wise and cross-pieces, forward and cross-cords, showing that it was made of wood and also cording. It was also covered with a cushion ('''[[आस्तरण|Āstaraṇa]]''') and a pillow ('''[[उपबर्हण|Upabarhaṇa]]'''), had a seat ('''[[आसाद|Āsāda]]''') and a support ('''Upaśraya'''). Similar seats are described in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_293> i. 5. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 397;<br> Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Aranyaka,'' 19.</ref> and the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx5_ve1_293> ii. 24.</ref> The seat for the king at the royal consecration is described in very similar terms in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx6_ve1_293> viii. 5;<br> 6;<br> 12.</ref> where the height of the feet is placed at a span, and the lengthwise and cross-pieces are each to be a cubit, while the interwoven part (''[[विवयन|vivayana]]'') is to be of [[मुञ्ज|Muñja]] grass, and the seat of [[उदुम्बर|Udumbara]] wood. In another passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx7_ve1_293> xiv. 2, 65. See his note in Whitney's Translation of the Atharvaveda, 765.</ref> Lanman seems to take the seat meant as a ‘long reclining chair.’ There also a cushion ('''[[उपधान|Upadhāna]]''') and coverlet ('''Upavāsana''') are mentioned. The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] repeatedly describes the [[आसन्दी|Āsandī]] in terms showing that it was an elaborate seat. In one place<ref name=fx8_ve1_293> v. 4, 4, 1.</ref> it is said to be made of [[खदिर|Khadira]] wood, perforated (''vi-tṛṇṇā''), and joined with straps (''[[वर्ध्र|vardhra]]-yutā'') like that of the Bhāratas. At the [[सौत्रामणी|Sautrāmaṇī]] rite<ref name=fx9_ve1_293> xii. 8, 3, 4 ''et seq.''</ref> (an Indra sacrifice) the seat is of [[उदुम्बर|Udumbara]] wood, is knee-high, and of unlimited width and depth, and is covered with plaited reed-work. The  imperial seat<ref name=fx10_ve1_293> xiv. 1, 3, 8 ''et seq.''</ref> is to be shoulder-high, of [[उदुम्बर|Udumbara]] wood, and wound all over with cords of Balvaja grass (''Eleusina indica''). Elsewhere<ref name=fx11_ve1_293> vi. 7, 1, 12 ''et seq.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 155.</ref> the seat is a span high, a cubit in width and depth, of [[उदुम्बर|Udumbara]] wood, and covered with reed-grass cords, and daubed with clay.

आसन्दी-वन्त्
<u>'''Āsandī-vant,'''</u> ‘possessing the throne,’ is the title of the royal city of '''[[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]] [[पारिक्षित|Pārikṣita]],''' in which the horse, for his famous [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], was bound. The authorities both cite a [[गाथा|Gāthā]] for the fact, but they differ as to the priest who celebrated the rite. In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_294> xiii. 5, 4, 2.</ref> he is stated to have been [[इन्द्रोत दैवाप शौनक|Indrota <a class="pada_vei" href="दैवाप">Daivāpa]] Śaunaka», but in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_294> viii. 21. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 9, 1. Pāṇini, viii. 2, 12, knows the name.</ref> '''[[तुर कावषेय|Tura Kāvaṣeya]].'''

आ-साद
<u>'''Ā-sāda,'''</u> ‘seat,’ occurs in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_295> xv. 3, 8.</ref> as a description of part of the settle ('''[[आसन्दी|Āsandī]]''') of the '''[[व्रात्य|Vrātya]].''' It seems best to regard it with Whitney<ref name=fx2_ve1_295> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 771.</ref> as the seat proper; Aufrecht,<ref name=fx3_ve1_295> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 131.</ref> Zimmer,<ref name=fx4_ve1_295> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 155.</ref> and Roth<ref name=fx5_ve1_295> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> render it as the ‘cushion for the seat,’ but that is sufficiently described by the word '''[[आस्तरण|Āstaraṇa]].'''

आसुरायण
<u>'''Āsurāyaṇa'''</u> is mentioned as a pupil of '''[[त्रैवणि|Traivaṇi]]''' in the first two Vaṃśas<ref name=fx1_ve1_296> ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3.</ref> (lists of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] in both recensions, but as a pupil of '''[[आसुरि|Āsuri]]''' in the third [[वंश|Vaṃśa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_296> vi. 5, 2. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 434, n.</ref>

आसुरि
<u>'''Āsuri'''</u> occurs in the first two Vaṃśas<ref name=fx1_ve1_297> ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3.</ref> (lists of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] as a pupil of '''[[भारद्वाज|Bhāradvāja]]''' and teacher of '''[[औपजन्धनि|Aupajandhani]],''' but in the third<ref name=fx2_ve1_297> vi. 5, 2.</ref> as a pupil of '''[[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]]''' and teacher of '''[[आसुरायण|Āsurāyaṇa]].''' He appears as a  ritual authority in the first four books of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_297> i. 6, 3, 26;<br> ii. 1, 4, 27;<br> 3, 1, 9;<br> 4, 1, 2;<br> 6, 1, 25. 33;<br> 3, 17;<br> iv. 5, 8, 14.</ref> and as an authority on dogmatic, specially noted for his insistence on truth, in the last book.<ref name=fx4_ve1_297> xiv. 1, 1, 33, and notes 1, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 430 ''et seq.,'' whose suggestion of the identity of this teacher and the founder of the Sāṃkhya system is not, however, acceptable. See Garbe, ''Sāṃkhya Philosophie,'' 29, 30.</ref>

आसुरि-वासिन्
<u>'''Āsuri-vāsin'''</u> is a name of '''[[प्राश्नी-पुत्र|Prāśnī-putra]]''' in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 5, 2, in both recensions).<br>==Foot Notes==

आ-सेचन
<u>'''Ā-secana'''</u> designates a vessel to hold liquids, such as meat juice (''[[यूषन्|yūṣan]]'')<ref name=fx1_ve1_299> Rv. i. 162, 13.</ref> or ghee.<ref name=fx2_ve1_299> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 9, 5. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 271.</ref> Of its shape and make we know nothing.

आ-स्तरण
<u>'''Ā-staraṇa'''</u> denotes the coverlet of the settle ('''[[आसन्दी|Āsandī]]''') of the '''[[व्रात्य|Vrātya]].'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_300> Av. xv. 3, 7.</ref> A tiger's skin serves as the coverlet of the king's seat in the royal consecration ([[राजसूय|Rājasūya]]).<ref name=fx2_ve1_300> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 5.</ref> In the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_300> i. 5. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 155.</ref> the word used is '''[[उपस्तरण|Upastaraṇa]].'''

आस्त्र-बुध्न
<u>'''Āstra-budhna'''</u> is the name of a man whom Indra is said in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_301> x. 171, 3.</ref> to have assisted. It is not clear whether '''Venya,''' who is mentioned in the same line, was his friend<ref name=fx2_ve1_301> So Grassmann and Griffith in their translations.</ref> or his enemy,<ref name=fx3_ve1_301> So Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 167.</ref> whom Indra saved or defeated for him.

आ-स्थातृ
<u>'''Ā-sthātṛ.'''</u>--The warrior in the chariot is once thus designated (as ‘standing on the car’) in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_302> vi. 47, 26. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 296.</ref> Normally he is named '''[[रथिन्|Rathin]]''' or '''[[रथेष्ठा|Ratheṣṭhā]].''' 

आ-स्राव
<u>'''Ā-srāva'''</u> (‘discharge’) denotes a disease, thrice referred to in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_303> i. 2, 4;<br> ii. 3, 2;<br> vi. 44, 2.</ref> the precise nature of which is uncertain. The Scholiast<ref name=fx2_ve1_303> On Av. i. 2, 4. ''Cf.'' on ii. 3, 2.</ref> in one place interprets it as painful urination (''mūtrātisāra''), while Lanman<ref name=fx3_ve1_303> In Whitney's Translation of the Atharvaveda, 3.</ref> suggests diabetes. Bloomfield<ref name=fx4_ve1_303> ''American Journal of Philology,'' 7, 467;<br> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, cxiii;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 233, 234.</ref> takes it to be diarrhœa, and Zimmer<ref name=fx5_ve1_303> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 392.</ref> argues that as the remedy is called ‘wound healer’ (''arus-srāṇa''), the sense is ‘the flux from unhealed wounds.’ Whitney<ref name=fx6_ve1_303> ''Op. cit.,'' 3, 41.</ref> renders it ‘flux,’ and questions Bloomfield's rendering. Ludwig<ref name=fx7_ve1_303> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 507, 509.</ref> translates it vaguely by ‘sickness’ and ‘cold.’

आहनस्या
<u>'''Āhanasyā'''</u> (‘unchaste’).--This word in the plural (‘lascivious verses’) denotes a section (xx. 136) of the Kuntāpa hymns of the Atharvaveda, which are of an obscene character.<ref name=fx1_ve1_304> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 36;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxx. 7. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 99.</ref>

आ-हाव
<u>'''Ā-hāva'''</u> denotes a pail or bucket, especially in conjunction with a well ('''[[अवत|Avata]]''').<ref name=fx1_ve1_305> Rv. i. 34, 8;<br> vi. 7, 2;<br> x. 101, 5;<br> 112, 6;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 26.</ref>

आह्नेय
<u>'''Āhneya.'''</u>--Patronymic of '''Sauca''' ([[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 12).<br>==Foot Notes==

इक्षु
<u>'''Ikṣu,'''</u> the generic name for the sugar-cane, is first found in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_307> i. 34, 5.</ref> and the later Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx2_ve1_307> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 7, 9;<br> iv. 2, 9 (''[[इक्षु|ikṣu]]-kāṇḍa''). In Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxv. 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhiṭā, vii. 3, 16, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], in. 8, ‘eyelash’ is meant. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 72;<br> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> Whether it grew wild, or was cultivated, does not appear from the references. 

इक्ष्वाकु
<u>'''Ikṣvāku.'''</u>--In the Rigveda this name occurs but once,<ref name=fx1_ve1_308> x. 60, 4.</ref> and in a doubtful context. It is clear, however, that it denotes a prince; later interpretations make '''Asamāti,''' whose name is read into the hymn, an [[इक्ष्वाकु|Ikṣvāku]] prince.<ref name=fx2_ve1_308> ''Cf.'' Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 167;<br> Sāṭyāyanaka in Max Müller, Rigveda, 4, c-cvii, 167;<br> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 42;<br> Bṛhaddevatā, vii. 85 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes.</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_308> xiv. 39, 9. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 680;<br> Whitney Translation of the Atharvaveda, 961.</ref> also the name is found in only one passage, where it is uncertain whether a descendant of [[इक्ष्वाकु|Ikṣvāku]], or [[इक्ष्वाकु|Ikṣvāku]] himself, is referred to; in either case he seems to be regarded as an ancient hero. In the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_308> xiii. 3, 12.</ref> mention is made of '''Tryaruṇa [[त्रैधात्व|Traidhātva]]''' [[ऐक्ष्वाक|Aikṣvāka]], who is identical with the '''Tryaruṇa [[त्रैवृष्ण|Traivṛṣṇa]]''' of the Bṛhaddevatā,<ref name=fx5_ve1_308> v. 14 ''et seq.''</ref> and with '''Tryaruṇa [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]]''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx6_ve1_308> v. 27, 3. ''Cf.'' Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 68-75;<br> Macdonell, ''Bṛhaddevatā,'' 2, 170;<br> Oldenberg, ''Vedic Hymns,'' 366 ''et seq.;<br>'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 133, 138;<br> 4, 324.</ref> The connection of [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]] with the Ikṣvākus is confirmed by the fact that '''[[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]]''' was an [[ऐक्ष्वाक|Aikṣvāka]], according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx7_ve1_308> xiii. 5, 4, 5.</ref> Thus the [[इक्ष्वाकु|Ikṣvāku]] line was originally a line of princes of the Pūrus. Zimmer<ref name=fx8_ve1_308> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 104, 130.</ref> places them on the upper Indus, but they may well have been somewhat further east.<ref name=fx9_ve1_308> ''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 218;<br> Geldner, ''ibid.,'' 3, 152.</ref> Later [[इक्ष्वाकु|Ikṣvāku]] is connected with Ayodhyā

इट
<u>'''1. Iṭa.'''</u>--This word occurs twice in the Atharvaveda. in the first passage<ref name=fx1_ve1_309> vi. 14, 3. ''Cf.'' iv. 19, 1;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 464.</ref> it seems to denote a bulrush of the sort that dies in a year; in the second<ref name=fx2_ve1_309> ix. 3, 18. ''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gesellschaft,'' 35, 718.</ref> it refers to the reed work of the house.

इट
<u>'''2. Iṭa'''</u> appears as a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] and a protégé of Indra in one hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_310> x. 171, 1.</ref> Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve1_310> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> however, thinks that the word is really part of a verb (''iṭ'') meaning ‘to err, wander’ (cp. ''aṭ''), and  that the name is a mere misunderstanding. It is already so regarded in the Anukramaṇī, but not apparently in the Bṛhaddevatā.<ref name=fx3_ve1_310> viii. 73. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 133.</ref>

इटन्त् काव्य
<u>'''Iṭant Kāvya'''</u> is the name of a sage, contemporary with '''[[केशिन् दार्भ्य|Keśin Dārbhya]],''' in the Kauṣitaki [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_311> vii. 4. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 293;<br> 2, 308.</ref> He is also mentioned as Iḍhant in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_311> xiv. 9, 16.</ref>

इतिहास
<u>'''Itihāsa,'''</u> as a kind of literature, is repeatedly mentioned along with '''[[पुराण|Purāṇa]]''' in the later texts of the Vedic period. The earliest reference to both occurs in the late fifteenth book of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_312> xv. 6, 4 ''et seq.''</ref> [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]] then appears in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_312> xiii. 4, 3, 12. 13, and as compounded in xi. 5, 6, 8;<br> 7, 9.</ref> the Jaiminīya,<ref name=fx3_ve1_312> i. 53.</ref> Bṛhadāraṇyaka,<ref name=fx4_ve1_312> ii. 4, 10;<br> iv. 1, 2;<br> v. 11.</ref> and Chāndogya Upaniṣads.<ref name=fx5_ve1_312> iii. 4, 1. 2;<br> vii. 1, 2. 4;<br> 2, 1;<br> 7, 1.</ref> In the latter it is expressly declared with [[पुराण|Purāṇa]] to make up the fifth Veda, while the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx6_ve1_312> xvi. 2, 21. 27.</ref> makes the [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]] a Veda and the [[पुराण|Purāṇa]] a Veda. The [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]]-veda and the [[पुराण|Purāṇa]]-veda appear also in the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx7_ve1_312> i. 10.</ref> while the Śatapatha<ref name=fx8_ve1_312> xiii. 4, 3, 12. 13.</ref> identifies the [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]] as well as the [[पुराण|Purāṇa]] with the Veda. In one passage '''[[अन्वाख्यान|Anvākhyāna]]''' and [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]] are distinguished<ref name=fx9_ve1_312> xi. 1, 6, 9. ''Cf.'' p. 24.</ref> as different classes of works, but the exact point of distinction is obscure; probably the former was supplementary. The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx10_ve1_312> ii. 9.</ref> mentions Itihāsas and Purāṇas in the plural.<br><br>There is nothing to show in the older literature what distinction there was, if any, between [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]] and [[पुराण|Purāṇa]]; and the late literature,<ref name=fx11_ve1_312> See Sāyaṇa's Introduction to the Rigveda, p. 12 (ed. Max Müller), and his commentary on Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 6, 8;<br> Śaṃkara on Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 4, 10.</ref> which has been elaborately examined by Sieg,<ref name=fx12_ve1_312> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 31 ''et seq.''</ref> yields no consistent result. Geldner<ref name=fx13_ve1_312> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 290. ''Cf.'' Sieg, ''op. cit.,'' 33.</ref> has conjectured that there existed a single work, the [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]]-[[पुराण|purāṇa]], a collection  of the old legends of all sorts, heroic, cosmogonic, genealogical; but though a work called [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]], and another called [[पुराण|Purāṇa]], were probably known to Patañjali,<ref name=fx14_ve1_312> Vārttika on Pāṇini, iv. 2, 60, and Mahābhāṣya (ed. Kielhorn), 2, 284.</ref> the inaccuracy of Geldner's view is proved by the fact that [[यास्क|Yāska]] shows no sign of having known any such work. To him the [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]] may be a part of the [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] literature itself,<ref name=fx15_ve1_312> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iv. 6.</ref> Aitihāsikas being merely people who interpret the Rigveda by seeing in it legends where others see myths.<ref name=fx16_ve1_312> ''Ibid.,'' ii. 16;<br> xii. 1.</ref> The fact, however, that the use of the compound form is rare, and that [[यास्क|Yāska]] regularly has [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]],<ref name=fx17_ve1_312> ''Ibid.,'' ii. 10;<br> 24;<br> iv. 6;<br> x. 26;<br> xii. 10.</ref> not [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]]-[[पुराण|purāṇa]], is against the theory of there ever having been one work.<br><br>The relation of [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]] to '''[[आख्यान|Ākhyāna]]''' is also uncertain. Sieg<ref name=fx18_ve1_312> ''Op. cit.,'' 31 ''et seq.''</ref> considers that the words [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]] and [[पुराण|Purāṇa]] referred to the great body of mythology, legendary history, and cosmogonic legend available to the Vedic poets, and roughly classed as a fifth Veda, though not definitely and finally fixed. Thus, Anvākhyānas, '''Anuvyākhyānas,''' and '''Vyākhyānas''' could arise, and separate Ākhyānas could still exist outside the cycle, while an [[आख्यान|Ākhyāna]] could also be a part of the [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]]-[[पुराण|purāṇa]]. He also suggests that the word [[आख्यान|Ākhyāna]] has special reference to the form of the narrative. Oldenberg,<ref name=fx19_ve1_312> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 37, 54 ''et seq.;<br>'' 39, 52 ''et seq. Cf.'' also ''Go7ttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen,'' 1908, 67 ''et seq.''</ref> following Windisch,<ref name=fx20_ve1_312> ''Verhandlungen der dreiunddreissigsten Versammlung deutcher Philologen und Sckulmänner in Gera'' (1879), 15 ''et seq.''</ref> and followed by Geldner,<ref name=fx21_ve1_312> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 284;<br> 2, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> Sieg, and others, has found in the [[आख्यान|Ākhyāna]] form a mixture of prose and verse, alternating as the narrative was concerned with the mere accessory parts of the tale, or with the chief points, at which the poetic form was naturally produced to correspond with the stress of the emotion. This theory has been severely criticized by Hertel<ref name=fx22_ve1_312> ''Vienna Oriental Journal,'' 18, 59 ''et seq.;<br>'' 23, 273 ''et seq. Cf.'' Winternitz, ''ibid.,'' 23, 102 ''et seq.''</ref> and von Schroeder.<ref name=fx23_ve1_312> ''Mystcrium und Mimus im Rigveda,'' 3 ''et seq.''</ref> These scholars, in accordance with older suggestions of Max Müller<ref name=fx24_ve1_312> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 183.</ref> and Lévi,<ref name=fx25_ve1_312> ''Le Théâtre indien,'' 303, 307.</ref> see in the  so-called [[आख्यान|Ākhyāna]] hymns of the Rigveda, in which Oldenberg finds actual specimens of the supposed literary genus, though the prose has been lost, actual remains of ritual dramas. Elsewhere<ref name=fx26_ve1_312> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 200 ''et seq.''</ref> it has been suggested that the hymns in question are merely literary dialogues.

इद्
<u>'''Id-, Idā-, Idu- Vatsara.'''</u> See '''[[संवत्सर|Saṃvatsara]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

इन्द्र-गोप
<u>'''Indra-gopa'''</u> (‘protected by Indra’), masc., is a designation of the cochineal insect in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (ii. 3, 6).<br>==Foot Notes==

इन्द्र-द्युम्न भाल्लवेय वैयाघ्र-पद्य
<u>'''Indra-[[द्युम्न|dyumna]] [[भाल्लवेय|Bhāllaveya]] Vaiyāghra-padya'''</u> is mentioned as a teacher who with others was unable to agree as to the nature of Agni Vaiśvānara, and who was instructed by '''[[अश्वपति|Aśvapati]] [[कैकेय|Kaikeya]].'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_315> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 6, 1, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 11, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> As [[भाल्लवेय|Bhāllaveya]] he is cited several times in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_315> i. 6, 1, 19;<br> xiii. 5, 3, 4. ''Cf.'' ii. 1, 4. 6.</ref> on ritual points.

इन्द्र-भू काश्यप
<u>'''Indra-bhū Kāśyapa'''</u> is mentioned as a pupil of '''[[मित्रभू काश्यप|Mitrabhū Kāśyapa]]''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_316> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 374.</ref>

इन्द्रोत
<u>'''1. Indrota'''</u> is twice mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_317> viii. 68, 10 ''et seq.''</ref> in a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Liberality’) as a giver of gifts. In the second passage he has the epithet [[आतिथिग्व|Ātithigva]], which shows conclusively that he was a son of [[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]], as Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_317> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 163.</ref> holds, and not of [[ऋक्ष|Ṛkṣa]], as Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_317> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> states.

इन्द्रोत दैवाप शौनक
<u>'''2. Indrota [[दैवाप|Daivāpa]] Śaunaka'''</u> is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_318> xiii. 5, 3, 5;<br> 4, 1;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 7, 7;<br> 8, 27.</ref> as the priest who officiated at the horse  sacrifice of '''[[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]],''' although this honour is attributed in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_318> viii. 21.</ref> to '''[[तुर कावषेय|Tura Kāvaṣeya]].''' He also appears in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_318> iii. 40, 1.</ref> as a pupil of '''Śruta,''' and is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_318> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 384, 385.</ref> He cannot be connected in any way with '''Devāpi,''' who occurs in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx5_ve1_318> x. 98. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 240.</ref>

इभ
<u>'''1. Ibha'''</u> is a word of somewhat doubtful sense and interpretation. It is found only in the Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve1_319> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 2, 14, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 9.</ref> and especially in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_319> i. 84, 17;<br> iv. 4, 1;<br> ix. 57, 3, and perhaps vi. 20, 8.</ref> According to Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_319> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> and Ludwig<ref name=fx4_ve1_319> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 246, 247.</ref> the sense is ‘retainer,’ and Zimmer<ref name=fx5_ve1_319> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 167.</ref> thinks that it includes not only dependants and servants, but also the royal family and the youthful cadets of the chief families. In the opinion of Pischel and Geldner<ref name=fx6_ve1_319> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, xv, xvi.</ref> it denotes ‘elephant.’ This view is supported by the authority of the commentators Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx7_ve1_319> On [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> and Mahīdhara;<ref name=fx8_ve1_319> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx9_ve1_319> vi. 12. It gives also the sense ‘retainer,’ and in Aśoka's Edicts, No. 5, Bühler, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 37, 279, finds a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] denoted by its Pāli form.</ref> too, gives ‘elephant’ as one of the senses of the word. Megasthenes<ref name=fx10_ve1_319> ''Apud'' Strabo, 704.</ref> and Nearchos<ref name=fx11_ve1_319> ''Ibid.,'' 705.</ref> tell us that elephants were a royal prerogative, and the derivative word '''[[इभ्य|Ibhya]]''' may thus be naturally explained as denoting merely ‘rich’ (lit., ‘possessor of elephants’).<ref name=fx12_ve1_319> But it may equally well be explained as ‘rich’ from the other sense of the primary word: ‘possessor of (many) retainers.’</ref>

इभ
<u>'''2. Ibha'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_320> vi. 20, 8. ''Cf.'' Pischel and Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, xvi;<br> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 380. Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 167, treats it as ‘retinue,’ as does Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 246, 247.</ref> appears certainly to be intended as an abbreviation of the proper name '''[[स्मद्इभ|Smadibha]].''' 

इभ्य
<u>'''Ibhya'''</u> occurs once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_321> i. 65, 4.</ref> in the plural, when a king is said to devour his Ibhyas as the fire the forest; and twice in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_321> i. 10, 1. 2.</ref> in one passage as the first member of a compound, and in the other as either a proper name or an adjective. Roth,<ref name=fx3_ve1_321> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> Ludwig,<ref name=fx4_ve1_321> Translation of the Rigveda 3, 247.</ref> and Zimmer<ref name=fx5_ve1_321> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 168.</ref> interpret the word as ‘retainers’ in the Rigveda, but in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] Roth thinks it means ‘rich.’ Pischel and Geldner<ref name=fx6_ve1_321> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, xvi. ''Cf.'' Sāyaṇa on Rigveda, ''loc. cit., dhaninaḥ,'' and Śaṃkara on Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ''loc. cit., īśvaro hastyāroho vā;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 476. ''Cf.'' also Little, ''Grammatical Index,'' 35.</ref> accept the sense in all passages. Bo7htlingk in his translation of the Chāndogya treats the word as simply a proper name, ‘Ibhya's village’ (''[[इभ्य|ibhya]]-[[ग्राम|grāma]]'') and ‘Ibhya.’

इरिण
<u>'''Iriṇa'''</u> (neut.) occurs not rarely in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_322> Av. iv. 15, 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 1, 3;<br> iii. 4, 8, 5;<br> v. 2, 4, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ix. 16.</ref> and Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve1_322> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2, 3, 2;<br> vii. 2, 1, 8.</ref> in the sense of ‘a cleft in the ground,’ usually natural (''sva-[[कृत|kṛta]]''). The same meaning is also, as Pischel<ref name=fx3_ve1_322> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 222-225.</ref> shows, to be ascribed to it in three passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx4_ve1_322> i. 186, 9;<br> viii. 4, 3;<br> 87, 1. 4.</ref> in one<ref name=fx5_ve1_322> viii. 4, 3.</ref> of which the hole is referred to as ‘made by water’ (''apā kṛtam''). In another passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve1_322> x. 34, 1. 9.</ref> the word refers to the place on which the dice are thrown. Hence Pischel<ref name=fx7_ve1_322> ''Op. cit.,'' 2, 225.</ref> concludes that the dicing-board must have been so called because it contained holes into which the dice had to be thrown if possible. Lüders,<ref name=fx8_ve1_322> ''Das Würfelspiel im alben Indian,'' 14.</ref> however, points out that this assumption is not necessary; the dice ('''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]]''') were merely thrown on a space dug out, which could be called '''[[इरिण|Iriṇa]],''' as being a hole in the ground, though not a natural one. This view is supported by the commentary of Sāyaṇa,<ref name=fx9_ve1_322> On Rv., ''loc. cit. (ā-sphūra).''</ref> as well as by [[दुर्ग|Durga]] in his note on the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]].<ref name=fx10_ve1_322> ix. 8 (''āsphuraka-sthāna'').</ref> 

इष श्यावाश्वि
<u>'''Iṣa Śyāvāśvi'''</u> is mentioned in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (‘list of teachers’) of the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iv. 16, 1) as a pupil of [[अगस्त्य|Agastya]].<br>==Foot Notes==

इषीका
<u>'''Iṣīkā,'''</u> ‘a stalk of reed grass,’ occurs frequently from the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_324> Av. vii. 56, 4;<br> xii. 2, 54;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 3, 4, 16, etc.;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 9;<br> ii. 134;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 24, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 6, 17, etc.;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 8.</ref> onwards, often as an emblem of fragility. In the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx2_ve1_324> ii. 16 (''v. l. ºike'').</ref> it seems to denote the pin fixed in the bar of a pen to keep cattle in (''argaleṣīke,'' ‘bolt and pin’). A basket (''[[शूर्प|śūrpa]]'') of [[इषीका|Iṣīkā]] is referred to in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_324> i. 1, 4, 19.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 71;<br> Oertel, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 122, n. 3.</ref>

इषु
<u>'''Iṣu'''</u> is the usual name for ‘arrow’ from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_325> ii. 24, 8;<br> viii. 7, 4, etc.;<br> Av. i. 13, 4, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 3, etc.;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 18.</ref> onwards. Other names are '''[[शर्य|Śarya]], Śārī,''' and '''[[बाण|Bāṇa]].''' In the hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_325> vi. 75, 15.</ref> which gives a catalogue of armour, two kinds of arrows are distinctly referred to: the one is poisoned (''ālāktā''), and has a head of horn (''ruru-śīrṣṇī''); the other is copper-, bronze-, or iron-headed (''ayo-mukham''). Poisoned (''digdhā'') arrows are also referred to in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx3_ve1_325> iv. 6, 7;<br> v. 18, 8. 15;<br> 31, 4.</ref> The arrows were feathered.<ref name=fx4_ve1_325> Rv. x. 18, 14;<br> vi. 75, 11;<br> Av. v. 25, 1.</ref> The parts of an arrow are enumerated in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx5_ve1_325> iv. 6.</ref> as the shaft (''[[शल्य|śalya]]''), the feather-socket (''[[पर्ण-धि|parṇa-dhi]]''), the point (''[[शृङ्ग|śṛṅga]]''), the neck of the point in which the shaft is fixed (''[[कुल्मल|kulmala]]''), and the '''[[अपस्कम्भ|Apaskambha]]''' and '''[[अपाष्ठ|Apāṣṭha]],''' which are of more doubtful significance. In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx6_ve1_325> i. 25.</ref> the parts of an arrow are given as the point (''anīka''), the ''[[शल्य|śalya]], [[तेजन|tejana]],'' and the feathers (''parṇāni''), where ''[[शल्य|śalya]]'' and ''[[तेजन|tejana]]'' must apparently mean the upper and lower parts of the shaft, since it is reasonable to suppose that the arrow is described as a whole consecutively. So in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx7_ve1_325> Av. iii. 25, 2.</ref> the arrow of Kāma is described as having feathers, a shaft  (''[[शल्य|śalya]]''), and a firm fastening (''[[कुल्मल|kulmala]]'').<ref name=fx8_ve1_325> See also Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 8, 1. 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxv. 1.</ref> The arrow was shot from the ear, and so is described in the Rigveda<ref name=fx9_ve1_325> Rv. vi. 75, 3;<br> ii. 24, 8 (''karṇayoni'').</ref> as ‘having the ear for its place of birth.’<br><br>As a measure of length, the [[इषु|Iṣu]] was five spans, say three feet.<ref name=fx10_ve1_325> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 5, 2, 10.</ref> A regular profession of arrow-making existed (''[[इषु|iṣu]]-kṛt,''<ref name=fx11_ve1_325> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 46, ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 184, 3.</ref> ''[[इषु|iṣu]]-kāra'').<ref name=fx12_ve1_325> ''Ibid.,'' xxx. 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 3, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 300;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 29, 286;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 275 ''et seq.;<br>'' 25, 337.</ref>

इषु त्रि-काण्डा
<u>'''Iṣu Tri-kāṇḍā'''</u> is the name given in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_326> iii. 33. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 205, n.</ref> to some constellation, perhaps Orion's girdle. It is mentioned with '''[[मृग|Mṛga]], [[मृगव्याध|Mṛgavyādha]],''' and '''[[रोहिणी|Rohiṇī]].'''

इषु-धि
<u>'''Iṣu-dhi'''</u> (‘arrow-holder’) is the name of the quiver which was carried by every bowman. The word is common from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_327> i. 33, 3;<br> vi. 75, 5;<br> x. 95, 3;<br> Av. ii. 33, 2;<br> iv. 10, 6, etc.;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 13.</ref> onwards. No trace is to be found in Vedic literature of the later practice of carrying two quivers.<ref name=fx2_ve1_327> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 274. Each quiver held from ten to twenty arrows.</ref> According to Pischel,<ref name=fx3_ve1_327> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 17. But see Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 182.</ref> the curious expression ''[[इषु|iṣu]]-kṛt'' in the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_327> i. 184, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 300.</ref> means quiver.

ईषा
<u>'''Īṣā'''</u> denotes the ‘pole of a chariot.’ Normally the chariot had one pole (''ekeṣaḥ''),<ref name=fx1_ve1_328> Rv. x. 135, 3;<br> iii. 53, 17;<br> viii. 5, 29;<br> Av. viii. 8, 23.</ref> but sometimes two poles are referred to.<ref name=fx2_ve1_328> ''Cf.'' Av. ii. 8, 4;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 2, 12 (''[[ईषा|īṣā]]-yugāni,'' but in iii. 9, 4, 3 dual);<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vii. 9, 14, etc.</ref> The word is often<ref name=fx3_ve1_328> Av., ''loc. cit.,'' etc.</ref> compounded with '''Yuga,''' ‘yoke,’ into which it was fastened (see '''Kha'''), and tied with ropes.<ref name=fx4_ve1_328> Rv. x. 60, 8. ''Cf.'' iii. 6, 6.</ref> Exactly how it was attached to the chariot we do not know.<ref name=fx5_ve1_328> ''[[वाणी|Vāṇī]]'' in Rv. i. 119, 5 is taken by Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 249, to refer to the front part of the chariot, but it seems simply to be ‘voice.’</ref> See also '''[[रथ|Ratha]].''' 

उक्षन्
<u>'''Ukṣan.'''</u> See '''Go.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

उक्षण्यायन
<u>'''Ukṣaṇyāyana'''</u> is mentioned in a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’) in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_330> viii. 25, 22.</ref> along with '''[[हरयाण|Harayāṇa]]''' and '''[[सुषामन्|Suṣāman]].''' Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_330> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 162, 270.</ref> thinks that all three are identical. Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_330> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> finds a reference to [[उक्षन्|Ukṣan]] himself in the verb ''ukṣaṇyati''<ref name=fx4_ve1_330> Rv. viii. 26, 9.</ref> and in the adjective ''ukṣaṇyu.''<ref name=fx5_ve1_330> Rv. viii. 23, 16.</ref>

उक्ष्णो-रन्ध्र काव्य
<u>'''Ukṣṇo-[[रन्ध्र|randhra]] Kāvya'''</u> is mentioned as a seer in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 9, 19).<ref name=fx1_ve1_331> ''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 397.</ref>

उखा
<u>'''Ukhā'''</u> is the regular word or a ‘cooking pot,’ usually mentioned in connexion with sacrifice, from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_332> i. 162, 13. 15;<br> iii. 53, 22;<br> Av. xii. 3, 23;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 6, 3, etc.</ref> onwards. It was made of clay (''mṛṇ-mayī'').<ref name=fx2_ve1_332> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xi. 59;<br> Taitdrīya Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 5, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 253, 271.</ref> See also '''[[स्थाली|Sthālī]].'''

उग्र
<u>'''Ugra'''</u> in one passage of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_333> iv. 3, 37. 38.</ref> seems to have a technical force, denoting ‘man in authority,’ or according to Max Müller's rendering, ‘policeman.’ Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_333> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> compares a passage in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx3_ve1_333> vii. 38, 6.</ref> where, however, the word has simply the general sense of ‘mighty man.’ Bo7htlingk,<ref name=fx4_ve1_333> P. 66 (with ''pratyenasaḥ'').</ref> in his rendering of the [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], treats the word as merely adjectival.

उग्र-देव
<u>'''Ugra-deva'''</u> is mentioned with '''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]]''' and '''Yadu''' in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_334> i. 36, 18 (Ugrādeva).</ref> apparently as a powerful protector. The name occurs also in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_334> xiv. 3, 17;<br> xxiii. 16, 11.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx3_ve1_334> v. 4, 12.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 147;<br> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' who suggests that in the Rv. passage the word should be taken adjectivally.</ref> where he is styled '''[[राजनि|Rājani]]''' and called a leper (''[[किलास|kilāsa]]''). 

उग्र-सेन
<u>'''Ugra-sena'''</u> is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 5, 4, 3), and in a [[गाथा|Gāthā]] there cited as being, with '''[[भीमसेन|Bhīmasena]]''' and '''[[श्रुतसेन|Śrutasena]],''' a Pārikṣitīya and a brother of '''[[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]].''' The brothers were cleansed by the horse sacrifice from sin.<br>==Foot Notes==

उच्चैः-श्रवस् कौपयेय
<u>'''Uccaiḥ-śravas Kaupayeya'''</u> appears in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 29, 1-3) as a king of the '''Kurus''' and as maternal uncle of '''[[केशिन्|Keśin]].''' His connexion with the Kurus is borne out by the fact that '''[[उपमश्रवस्|Upamaśravas]]''' was son of '''Kuruśravaṇa,''' the names being strikingly similar.<br>==Foot Notes==

उच्-छीर्षक
<u>'''Uc-chīrṣaka.'''</u>--This word, occurring in the description of the couch (''[[पर्य्अङ्क|paryaṅka]]'') in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_337> ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 403;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 155.</ref> (i. 5), apparently denotes a cushion for the head. See also '''[[आसन्दी|Āsandī]].'''

उत्तर कुरु
<u>'''Uttara Kuru.'''</u>--The Uttara Kurus, who play a mythical part in the Epic and later literature, are still a historical people in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_338> viii. 14.</ref> where they are located beyond the Himālaya (''pareṇa Himavantam''). In another passage,<ref name=fx2_ve1_338> viii. 23.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 165;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 101, 102;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 75, n.</ref> however, the country of the Uttara Kurus is stated by '''[[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]] [[सात्यहव्य|Sātyahavya]]''' to be a land of the gods (''deva-[[क्षेत्र|kṣetra]]''), but '''[[जानंतपि|Jānaṃtapi]] Atyarāti''' was anxious to conquer it, so that it is still not wholly mythical. It is reasonable to accept Zimmer's view that the northern Kurus were settled in Kaśmīr, especially as '''[[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]]''' is the region where tribes advancing from Kaśmīr might naturally be found. ''Cf.'' '''[[उद्ईच्यस्|Udīcyas]].'''

उत्तर मद्र
<u>'''Uttara Madra'''</u> is the name of a tribe mentioned with the '''Uttara Kurus''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_339> viii. 14.</ref> as living beyond the Himālaya. Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve1_339> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 102.</ref> points out that in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_339> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 371.</ref> '''[[काम्बोज|Kāmboja]] [[औपमन्यव|Aupamanyava]]''' is a pupil of '''Madragāra,''' and thence  infers that Kambojas and Madras were not far distant in space. This conclusion is perfectly reasonable in view of the probable position of the Kāmbojas.<ref name=fx4_ve1_339> See map in Pargiter, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, p. 332. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 165.</ref>

उत्-तान आङ्गिरस
<u>'''Ut-tāna Āṅgirasa'''</u> is mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_340> ii. 3, 2, 5. ''Cf.'' ii. 2, 5, 3.</ref> as a quasi-mythical person who received all good things, and yet was not harmed, as he was really a form of the earth, according to Sāyaṇa's<ref name=fx2_ve1_340> On [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 3, 2, 5.</ref> explanation. His name occurs also in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx3_ve1_340> ix. 9.</ref> the Pancaviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx4_ve1_340> i. 8, 11.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx5_ve1_340> iii. 10, 2. 3.</ref>

उदग्-अयन
<u>'''Udag-ayana.'''</u> See '''[[सूर्य|Sūrya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

उद्-अङ्क शौल्बायन
<u>'''Ud-[[अङ्क|aṅka]] Śaulbāyana.'''</u>--His views on [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], which he identified with the vital airs (''[[प्राण|prāṇa]]''), are mentioned in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iv. 1, 3). He would thus have been a contemporary of '''[[जनक|Janaka]]''' of [[विदेह|Videha]]. He is also mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (vii. 5, 4, 2) as holding that the Daśarātra ceremony was the prosperity or best part of the Sattra (‘sacrificial session’).<br>==Foot Notes==

उद्-अञ्चन
<u>'''Ud-añcana.'''</u>--This word, occurring only metaphorically in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_343> v. 44, 13 (''dhiyām udañcanaḥ,'' ‘a very well of prayers’).</ref> means a ‘pail’ or ‘bucket’ in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve1_343> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 32;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 3, 5, 21.</ref>

उदमय आत्रेय
<u>'''Udamaya Ātreya'''</u> is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 22) as [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], or domestic priest, of '''[[अङ्ग वैरोचन|Aṅga Vairocana]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

उदर शाण्डिल्य
<u>'''Udara Śāṇḍilya'''</u> is mentioned as a teacher in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_345> i. 9, 3.</ref> and as a pupil of '''[[अतिधन्वन् शौनक|Atidhanvan Śaunaka]]''' in the '''[[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_345> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 384.</ref>

उदल
<u>'''Udala,'''</u> a [[वैश्वामित्र|Vaiśvāmitra]], is mentioned in the Pañcaviṃsa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiv. 11, 33) as the seer of a Sāman. <br>==Foot Notes==

उद्-आज
<u>'''Ud-āja'''</u> is the word used in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_347> i. 10, 16;<br> iv. 3, 1.</ref> to denote the share of the booty of war taken by the king after a victory (''saṃgrāmaṃ jitvā''). This interpretation, which is that of Delbrück,<ref name=fx2_ve1_347> ''Festgruss an Bo7htlingk,'' 25.</ref> is clearly correct, as against the older version, ‘march out,’ given by von Schroeder<ref name=fx3_ve1_347> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, 1, xv.</ref> and accepted by Bo7htlingk.<ref name=fx4_ve1_347> Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> The [[उद्आज|Udāja]] thus corresponds precisely with the Homeric  This sense also suits Nirāja, the variant of both the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_347> xxviii. 3.</ref> and the Kapiṣṭhala<ref name=fx6_ve1_347> xliv. 3.</ref> Saṃhitās.

उदान
<u>'''Udāna'''</u> is usually the fifth of the vital breaths ('''[[प्राण|Prāṇa]]''') when five are enumerated.<ref name=fx1_ve1_348> ''E.g.,'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 12, 9;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, v. 4;<br> 10;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 2, 2, 5;<br> xi. 8, 3, 6 (in the order [[प्राण|Prāṇa]], [[व्य्आन|Vyāna]], [[अपान|Apāna]], [[उदान|Udāna]], [[समान|Samāna]]);<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 5, 3;<br> iii. 4, 1 ([[समान|Samāna]] is omitted);<br> iii. 9, 26;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 13, 5;<br> v. 23, 1. 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 3, 3, etc.</ref> Sometimes<ref name=fx2_ve1_348> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, i. 20;<br> vii. 27;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 4, 2, 10, etc. (with [[व्य्आन|Vyāna]]);<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 2 (with [[समान|Samāna]]).</ref> it appears as the second, coming after [[प्राण|Prāṇa]], and followed by [[व्य्आन|Vyāna]] or [[समान|Samāna]]. Again,<ref name=fx3_ve1_348> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vi. 20;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 2, 2;<br> ix. 2, 4, 5, etc.</ref> it is found simply opposed to [[प्राण|Prāṇa]], or it simply follows [[प्राण|Prāṇa]] and [[अपान|Apāna]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_348> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, viii. 8;<br> xi. 1.</ref> In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_348> xi. 2, 4, 5.</ref> it is treated as the breath that consumes food, a notion traceable in the later Upaniṣads,<ref name=fx6_ve1_348> Maitrāyaṇī [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 6.</ref> while it is also regarded as the wind that rises up by the throat,<ref name=fx7_ve1_348> Amṛtabindu [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], 34.</ref> and leads the spirit forth at death.<ref name=fx8_ve1_348> [[प्रश्न|Praśna]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 7. ''Cf.'' Deussen, ''Philosophy of the Upaniṣads,'' 280.</ref>

उद्-ईच्यस्
<u>'''Ud-īcyas.'''</u>--The Brāhmaṇas of the northern parts are referred to in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_349> xi. 4, 1, 1. ''Cf.'' Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 6.</ref> as engaging, with '''[[स्वैदायन|Svaidāyana]] [[शौनक|Śaunaka]]''' as their spokesman, in a dispute with the Kurupañcāla [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] '''[[उद्दालक आरुणि|Uddālaka Āruṇi]],''' and as vanquishing him. Their relation to the Kurupañcālas appears also from the fact that in  the same [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_349> iii. 2, 3, 15. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 191;<br> Lévi, ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 35.</ref> reference is made to the speech of the north being similar to that of the Kurupañcālas. The speech of the Northerners was also celebrated for purity; hence Brāhmaṇas used to go to the north for purposes of study, according to the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_349> vii. 6. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 1, 153;<br> 2, 309.</ref> while in the Buddhist texts the school of Takṣaśilā (in [[गन्धार|Gandhāra]]) is famous as a resort of students.<ref name=fx4_ve1_349> Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 8, 28, 203.</ref> Possibly, too, Sanskrit was specially developed in Kaśmīr, as suggested by Franke.<ref name=fx5_ve1_349> ''Cf. Pāli und Sanskrit'' (1902), 88, 89.</ref> See also '''Kuru.'''

उदुम्बर
<u>'''Udumbara.'''</u>--This name of the ''Ficus glomerata'' does not occur in the Rigveda, but is often found from the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_350> xix. 31, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 1, 6, etc.;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 1, 33;<br> vii. 4, 1, 38, etc.</ref> onwards. For ritual purposes of all kinds its wood was constantly used. The sacrificial post (''[[यूप|yūpa]]'')<ref name=fx2_ve1_350> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 1, 6.</ref> and the sacrificial ladle<ref name=fx3_ve1_350> ''Ibid.,'' v. 4, 7, 3.</ref> were made of it, and amulets of [[उदुम्बर|Udumbara]] are mentioned.<ref name=fx4_ve1_350> Atharvaveda, xix. 31, 1.</ref> Its wood, like that of other kinds of figtree-'''[[अश्वत्थ|Aśvattha]], [[न्यग्रोध|Nyagrodha]],''' and '''[[प्लक्ष|Plakṣa]]'''--was considered suitable for employment at the sacrifice.<ref name=fx5_ve1_350> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 8, 4.</ref> The sweetness of its fruit is referred to in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx6_ve1_350> vii. 15.</ref> where it is put on the same level as '''[[मधु|Madhu]].''' It is there also spoken of as ripening three times a year.<ref name=fx7_ve1_350> v. 24.</ref> A forest of [[उदुम्बर|Udumbara]] trees is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx8_ve1_350> xvi. 6, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 59.</ref>

उद्दालक आरुणि
<u>'''Uddālaka Āruṇi.'''</u>--Uddālaka, son of Aruṇa, is one of the most prominent teachers of the Vedic period. He was a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] of the Kurupañcālas, according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_351> xi. 4, 1, 2. ''Cf.'' Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 6.</ref> This statement is confirmed by the fact that he was teacher of '''Proti [[कौसुरुबिन्दि|Kausurubindi]]''' of Kauśāmbī,<ref name=fx2_ve1_351> xii. 2, 2, 13.</ref> and that his son  '''Svetaketu''' is found disputing among the Pañcālas.<ref name=fx3_ve1_351> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 1;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 3, 1.</ref> He was a pupil of Aruṇa, his father,<ref name=fx4_ve1_351> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 33 (in both recensions).</ref> as well as of [[पतञ्चल काप्य|Patañcala Kāpya]],<ref name=fx5_ve1_351> ''Ibid.,'' iii. 7, 1.</ref> of [[मद्र|Madra]], while he was the teacher of the famous [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]]<ref name=fx6_ve1_351> ''Ibid.,'' vi. 3, 15;<br> 4, 33.</ref> [[वाजसनेय|Vājasaneya]] and of [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]],<ref name=fx7_ve1_351> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xv.</ref> although the former is represented elsewhere<ref name=fx8_ve1_351> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 7, 31.</ref> as having silenced him. He overcame in argument [[प्राचीनयोग्य|Prācīnayogya]] [[शौचेय|Śauceya]],<ref name=fx9_ve1_351> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 3, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> and apparently also [[भद्रसेन आजातशत्रव|Bhadrasena Ājātaśatrava]],<ref name=fx10_ve1_351> v. 5, 5, 14. Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 141, has Āraṇi. There is a chronological difficulty in taking [[आरुणि|Āruṇi]] as meant, since [[आजातशत्रव|Ājātaśatrava]] must presumably have been a descendant of [[अजातशत्रु|Ajātaśatru]], a contemporary of [[जनक|Janaka]] (see [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1), who again was a patron of [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]], a pupil of [[आरुणि|Āruṇi]]. But this difficulty is not fatal.</ref> though the text here seems to read the name as Āraṇi. He was a [[गौतम|Gautama]],<ref name=fx11_ve1_351> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 3, 2;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 1.</ref> and is often alluded to as such. As an authority on questions of ritual and philosophy, he is repeatedly referred to by his patronymic name [[आरुणि|Āruṇi]] in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx12_ve1_351> i. 1, 2, 11;<br> ii. 2, 1, 34;<br> iii. 3, 4, 19;<br> iv. 4, 8, 9;<br> xi. 2, 6, 12.</ref> the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx13_ve1_351> iii. 5, 1.</ref> the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx14_ve1_351> iii. 11, 4;<br> v. 11, 2;<br> 17, 1;<br> vi. 8, 1.</ref> and occasionally in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]],<ref name=fx15_ve1_351> viii. 7.</ref> the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]],<ref name=fx16_ve1_351> xxvi. 4.</ref> and the Ṣaḍviṃśa<ref name=fx17_ve1_351> i. 6.</ref> Brāhmaṇas, as well as the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx18_ve1_351> i. 1 ''et seq.''</ref> In the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā he is not mentioned, according to Geldner,<ref name=fx19_ve1_351> ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 146.</ref> but only his father Aruṇa; his name does not occur, according to Weber,<ref name=fx20_ve1_351> ''Indian Literature,'' 69. But ''cf.'' xxiii. 1, 5.</ref> in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], but in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx21_ve1_351> vii. 8. ''Cf.'' viii. 6.</ref> he is, as [[आरुणि|Āruṇi]], known as a contemporary of '''[[दिवोदास भैमसेनि|Divodāsa Bhaimaseni]],''' and in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx22_ve1_351> i. 42, 1.</ref> he is mentioned as serving '''[[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]] [[चैकितानेय|Caikitāneya]].''' In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] tradition he seldom appears. There is an allusion in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx23_ve1_351> vii. 2, 2, 1 (a late passage).</ref> to Kusurubinda [[औद्दालकि|Auddālaki]], and according to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx24_ve1_351> iii. 11, 8, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> [[नचिकेतस्|Naciketas]] was a son of [[वाजश्रवस|Vājaśravasa]] [[गौतम|Gautama]], who  is made out to be Uddālaka by Sāyaṇa.<ref name=fx25_ve1_351> On [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit. Cf.'' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 11.</ref> But the episode of [[नचिकेतस्|Naciketas]], being somewhat unreal, cannot be regarded as of historical value in proving relationship. Aruṇa is known to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā. A real son of Uddālaka was the famous '''[[श्वेतकेतु|Śvetaketu]],''' who is expressly reported by Āpastamba<ref name=fx26_ve1_351> See Bühler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 2, xxxviii;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 39.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 170, n.;<br> 2, 201, 202;<br> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 396, n.;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xl., xli.</ref> to have been in his time an Avara or later authority, a statement of importance for the date of [[आरुणि|Āruṇi]].

उद्दालकायन
<u>'''Uddālakāyana'''</u> is mentioned as a pupil of [[जाबालायन|Jābālāyana]] in the second [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) contained in the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iv. 6, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

उद्र
<u>'''Udra'''</u> is the name of an animal occurring only in the list of sacrificial victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] given in the Saṃhitās of the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_353> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 20, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 18;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 37.</ref> According to Mahīdhara<ref name=fx2_ve1_353> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> it was a crab; but as the commentary on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve1_353> ''Loc. cit.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 95, 96;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 247. ''Udrin'' occurs in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 5.</ref> calls it a watercat, there can be no doubt that it was an otter.

उद्धि
<u>'''Uddhi'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_354> Av. viii. 8, 22;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 2, 2, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 3, 8.</ref> denotes some part of a chariot, probably the seat,<ref name=fx2_ve1_354> So Whitney's Translation of the Atharvaveda, 506;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 149.</ref> but, according to Roth,<ref name=fx3_ve1_354> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> the frame resting on the axle.

उप-केतु
<u>'''Upa-ketu'''</u> is the name of a man mentioned in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā (xiii. 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

उप-कोसल कामलायन
<u>'''Upa-[[कोसल|kosala]] Kāmalāyana'''</u> is mentioned as a teacher and a pupil of '''[[सत्यकाम|Satyakāma]] [[जाबाल|Jābāla]]''' in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iv. 10, 1; 14, 1). <br>==Foot Notes==

उप-क्वस
<u>'''Upa-kvasa'''</u> is the name in the Atharvaveda (vi. 50, 2) of a noxious insect injurious to seed. Sāyaṇa, however, reads the word as a plural adjective (''a-pakvasaḥ = a-dagdāḥ''), but the Paippalāda recension supports the form ''upakvasaḥ.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 237; Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 486; Whitney's Translation of the Atharvaveda, 318.<br>==Foot Notes==

उप-गु सौश्रवस
<u>'''Upa-gu Sauśravasa'''</u> is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiv. 6, 8) as [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of '''[[कुत्स औरव|Kutsa Aurava]],''' by whom he was murdered because of his paying homage to Indra.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 268; Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 57.<br>==Foot Notes==

उप-चित्
<u>'''Upa-cit'''</u> occurs in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_359> xii. 97.</ref> as the name of a disease, which Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_359> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> renders as ‘swelling,’ and which Bloomfield<ref name=fx3_ve1_359> ''Proceedings of the American Oriental Society,'' October, 1887, xviii.</ref> identifies with '''[[अपचित्|Apacit]].'''

उप-जिह्विका
<u>'''Upa-jihvikā, Upa-jīkā, Upa-dīkā'''</u> are all forms of one word denoting a species of ant.<ref name=fx1_ve1_360> ''[[उपजिह्विका|Upajihvikā]]'' is the form in Rv. viii. 102, 21;<br> ''upajīkā'' in Av. ii. 3, 4;<br> vi. 100, 2;<br> but ''upacīkā'' in both passages in the Paippalāda recension;<br> ''upadīkā'' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 3, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 1, 4;<br> 10, 9;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1, 1, 8.</ref> To these ants is attributed in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_360> vi. 100, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 7, 482 ''et seq.;<br> Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 511;<br> Whitney's Translation of the Atharvaveda, 41, 354;<br> Bergaigne and Henry, ''Manuel Védique,'' 153.</ref> the power of penetrating to water which possesses curative properties. They were accordingly used in all sorts of spells against poisoning. The belief in their healing qualities was no doubt due to the well-known properties of the earth of ant-heaps which contains their water.

उप-धान
<u>'''Upa-dhāna'''</u> denotes the ‘cushion’ of a seat ('''[[आसन्दी|Āsandī]]''') in the Atharvaveda (xiv. 2, 65). It corresponds to the '''[[उपबर्हण|Upabarhaṇa]]''' of other texts. <br>==Foot Notes==

उप-धि
<u>'''Upa-dhi'''</u> occurs once each in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_362> ii. 39, 4.</ref> and the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_362> vi. 70, 3.</ref> in conjunction with '''[[प्रधि|Pradhi]],''' denoting part of the wheel of a chariot. It is impossible to decide exactly what part is meant. Roth,<ref name=fx3_ve1_362> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> Zimmer<ref name=fx4_ve1_362> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 248 (ignoring the Atharvaveda passage).</ref> and Bloomfield,<ref name=fx5_ve1_362> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 493.</ref> agree in thinking that the word denotes the spokes collectively. Whitney,<ref name=fx6_ve1_362> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 334.</ref> considering this improbable, prefers to see in it the designation of a solid wheel, [[प्रधि|Pradhi]] being presumably the rim and [[उपधि|Upadhi]] the rest. Other possibilities<ref name=fx7_ve1_362> Bloomfield, ''loc. cit.''</ref> are that the [[उपधि|Upadhi]] is a rim beneath the felly, or the felly itself as compared with the tire (ordinarily '''Pavi''').

उप-निषद्
<u>'''Upa-niṣad'''</u> in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve1_363> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 3, 5, 12;<br> 4, 5, 1;<br> 5, 1, 1;<br> xii. 2, 2, 23, etc.;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 1, 10;<br> 13, 4;<br> viii. 8, 4. 5;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1, 20;<br> iv. 2, 1;<br> v. 5, 3;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 1, 6;<br> 2, 5;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1, etc.</ref> normally denotes the ‘secret sense’ of some word or text, sometimes the ‘secret rule’ of the mendicant. But in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_363> ii. 4, 10;<br> iv. 1, 2;<br> 5, 11.</ref> it is already used in the plural as the designation of a class of writings, no doubt actually existing and similar to the Upaniṣads in the nature of their subject-matter and its treatment. Similarly the sections of the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] end with the words ''ity [[उपनिषद्|upaniṣad]].'' The [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx3_ve1_363> iii. 1, 1.</ref> commences its third part with the title ‘The [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] of the Saṃhitā,’ and the title occurs also in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx4_ve1_363> vii. 2. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 3, 1.</ref> The exact primary sense of the expression is doubtful. The natural derivation, adopted by Max Müller<ref name=fx5_ve1_363> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 1, xxxiii ''et seq. Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 204.</ref> and usual ever since, makes the word mean firstly a session of pupils, hence secret doctrine, and secondly the title of a work on secret doctrine. Oldenberg,<ref name=fx6_ve1_363> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 50, 457;<br> 54, 70;<br> ''Die Literatur des alten Indien,'' 72.</ref> however, traces the use of the word to the earlier  sense of ‘worship’ (''cf. upāsana''). Deussen<ref name=fx7_ve1_363> ''Philosophy of the Upaniṣads,'' 16 ''et seq.''</ref> considers the original sense to have been ‘secret word,’ next ‘secret text,’ and then ‘secret import,’ but this order of meaning is improbable. Hopkins<ref name=fx8_ve1_363> ''Religions of India,'' 218.</ref> suggests that [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] denotes a subsidiary treatise, but this sense does not account naturally for the common use as ‘secret meaning,’ which is far more frequent than any other.

उप-पति
<u>'''Upa-pati,'''</u> ‘the gallant,’ is mentioned with the [[जार|Jāra]], ‘lover,’ in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_364> xxx. 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 4, 1.</ref> as a victim in the human sacrifice (''puruṣamedha'').

उप-बर्हण
<u>'''Upa-barhaṇa'''</u> denotes a ‘pillow’ or ‘cushion,’ especially of a seat (''[[आसन्दी|āsandī]]''), occurring in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_365> x. 85, 7.</ref> the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_365> ix. 5, 28;<br> xii. 2, 19. 20;<br> xv. 3, 7.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx3_ve1_365> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 12;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 8, 4, 10;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 6, 10;<br> 6, 8, 9;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxviii. 4, etc.</ref> The feminine Upabarhaṇī is found in the Rigveda with the same sense, but used metaphorically of the earth.

उप-मन्थनी
<u>'''Upa-manthanī'''</u> is used in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_366> vi. 3, 13.</ref> to denote ‘churning sticks.’ In the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_366> xxx. 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 8, 1.</ref> the ‘churner’ (''upamanthitṛ'') is included in the list of victims at the human sacrifice (''puruṣamedha''), and the verb ''upa-manth'' is often used of churning or mixing fluids.<ref name=fx3_ve1_366> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 8, 4. 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 1, 6;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 2, 4.</ref>

उप-मन्यु
<u>'''Upa-manyu'''</u> is, according to Ludwig,<ref name=fx1_ve1_367> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 113.</ref> the name of a person in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_367> i. 102. 9.</ref> but is more probably explained by Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_367> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> as a mere epithet. 

उपम-श्रवस्
<u>'''Upama-śravas'''</u> is mentioned in a hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_368> x. 33, 6. 7.</ref> as a son of '''Kuruśravaṇa,''' and grandson of '''[[मेधातिथि|Medhātithi]].''' The exact force of the reference to him in however, uncertain. According to the Bṛhaddevatā,<ref name=fx2_ve1_368> vii. 35. 36, with Macdonell's notes.</ref> followed by Ludwig,<ref name=fx3_ve1_368> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 165.</ref> and by Lanman,<ref name=fx4_ve1_368> ''Sanskrit reader,'' 386, 389.</ref> the poet in the hymn consoles [[उपमश्रवस्|Upamaśravas]] for the death of his grandfather, [[मेधातिथि|Medhātithi]]. Geldner,<ref name=fx5_ve1_368> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 150, n.</ref> on the other hand, thinks that the poet, who was '''[[कवष|Kavaṣa]] [[ऐलूष|Ailūṣa]],''' was ill-treated by his patron's son, [[उपमश्रवस्|Upamaśravas]], and cast into a ditch or well, where he uttered his complaint and appeal for mercy. But of this there is no adequate evidence, and the tradition of the Bṛhaddevatā seems sound.

उप-मित्
<u>'''Upa-mit'''</u> occurs twice in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_369> i. 59, 1;<br> iv. 5, 1.</ref> and once in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_369> ix. 3, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 153;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 596;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 525.</ref> as the designation of some part of a house. The passages in the Rigveda leave little doubt that the word means an upright pillar. As it is, in the Atharvaveda, coupled with '''[[परिमित्|Parimit]]''' and '''[[प्रतिमित्|Pratimit]],''' the conclusion is natural that the latter word denotes the beams supporting the [[उपमित्|Upamit]], presumably by leaning against it at an angle, while '''[[परिमित्|Parimit]]''' denotes the beams connecting the Upamits horizontally. These interpretations, however, can only be conjectural. See also '''[[गृह|Gṛha]].'''

उपर
<u>'''Upara,'''</u> which, according to Pischel,<ref name=fx1_ve1_370> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 109. This is the sense of the form ''upala'' (Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxv. 8, etc.).</ref> means ‘stone’ in general, is the technical name of the stone on which the Soma plant was laid in order to be pounded for the extraction of the juice by other stones (''adri, grāvan''). The word is rare, occurring only thrice in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_370> i. 79, 3;<br> x. 94, 5;<br> 175, 3.</ref> and once in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx3_ve1_370> vi. 49, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 154;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 317;<br> Von Schroeder, ''Mysterium und Mimus,'' 414.</ref> 

उपल-प्रक्षिणी
<u>'''Upala-prakṣiṇī'''</u> occurs once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_371> ix. 112, 3.</ref> where it designates the occupation of a woman, as opposed to that of her son, who is a poet (''[[कारु|kāru]]''), and to that of his father, who is a physician (''[[भिषज्|bhiṣaj]]''). [[यास्क|Yāska]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_371> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 5.</ref> renders the word by ‘maker of groats’ (''[[सक्तु|saktu]]-kārikā''), and Roth,<ref name=fx3_ve1_371> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> Grassmann,<ref name=fx4_ve1_371> ''Ibid., s.v.,'' ‘fitting the upper (to the lower) millstone.’</ref> Zimmer,<ref name=fx5_ve1_371> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 269. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedaschrestomathie, s.v.,'' who, taking ''pṛc'' in the sense of ‘fill,’ explains the compound as ‘filling the upper millstone,’ an interpretation which as it stands is unintelligible.</ref> as well as others, connect it with the operation of grinding corn. Pischel,<ref name=fx6_ve1_371> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 308-310.</ref> however, who points out that corn was not ground between two stones, but beaten on a stone with a pestle (''[[दृषद्|dṛṣad]]''), considers that [[उपल-प्रक्षिणी|Upala-prakṣiṇī]] denotes a woman that assisted at the crushing of Soma (''cf.'' '''[[उपर|Upara]]'''). Von Schroeder,<ref name=fx7_ve1_371> ''Mysterium und Mimus,'' 412 ''et seq.'' Von Schroeder does not accept the view that the mother of the singer is alluded to;<br> but it seems impossible to draw any other conclusion from the language of the passage, and his own explanation of the word as referring to a corn-mother is very improbable;<br> ''cf.'' Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 204.</ref> who more correctly points out that there is no objection to regarding ''upala'' as the mortar in which the corn was placed and then beaten with the pestle, renders the word literally as ‘one who fills the (lower) stone (with corn).’

उपला
<u>'''Upalā'''</u> in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve1_372> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 1, 22;<br> ii. 1, 14, 17;<br> ii. 2, 2, 1, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Von Schroeder, ''Mysterium und Mimus,'' 413, n. 3.</ref> may denote the upper and smaller ‘stone,’ which was used as a pestle with the '''[[दृषद्|Dṛṣad]]''' as the mortar, whereas '''[[उपर|Upara]]''' in the Saṃhitās denotes rather the mortar, and [[दृषद्|Dṛṣad]] the pestle. But see '''[[दृषद्|Dṛṣad]].'''

उप-वाक
<u>'''Upa-vāka'''</u> occurs in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_373> xix. 22;<br> 90;<br> xxi. 30 (as ‘healing’).</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve1_373> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 7, 1, 3;<br> 2, 9, etc.</ref> as a description of a species of grain, the ''Wrightia antidysenterica,'' known later as Indra-yava. The commentator Mahīdhara<ref name=fx3_ve1_373> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 22.</ref> simply glosses it with the more general term '''Yava.'''  According to the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, it formed the essential element of gruel (''[[करम्भ|karambha]]''), and [[उपवाक|Upavāka]] groats (''saktavaḥ'') are mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_373> xii. 9, 1, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 240, 270.</ref>

उप-वेशि
<u>'''Upa-veśi'''</u> is mentioned as a pupil of '''Kuśri''' in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 5, 3, in both recensions). See also '''[[औपवेशि|Aupaveśi]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

उप-श्री
<u>'''Upa-[[श्री|śrī]], Upa-śraya,'''</u> are two readings of the same term. The former is found in one recension of the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_375> i. 5.</ref> while the latter is probably the reading of the other recension of the [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_375> See Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 20, n. 3.</ref> and certainly the reading in one passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx3_ve1_375> xv. 3, 8. ''Cf.'' Whitney's note in his Translation.</ref> though the text has ''apaśrayaḥ,'' which is accepted as possible by Roth.<ref name=fx4_ve1_375> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' and still followed by Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> In both cases the term clearly means something connected with a couch ('''[[आसन्दी|Āsandī]]''' in the Atharvaveda, '''[[पर्य्अङ्क|Paryaṅka]]''' in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]). Aufrecht,<ref name=fx5_ve1_375> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 131.</ref> Roth,<ref name=fx6_ve1_375> ''S.v. [[अपश्रय|apaśraya]].''</ref> and Max Müller<ref name=fx7_ve1_375> ''Sacred Books af the East,'' 1, 278.</ref> render it as ‘coverlet’ or ‘cushion,’ but Whitney<ref name=fx8_ve1_375> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 777.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 402;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 155.</ref> seems evidently right in holding that it must mean a ‘support’ or something similar.

उप-स्तरण
<u>'''Upa-staraṇa'''</u> denotes in the description of the couch ('''[[पर्य्अङ्क|Paryaṅka]]''') in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_376> i. 5.</ref> a ‘coverlet,’ and has this sense, used metaphorically, in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_376> ix. 69, 5.</ref> also. In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_376> v. 19, 12.</ref> it seems to have the same meaning. Whitney,<ref name=fx4_ve1_376> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 254.</ref> however, renders it ‘couch,’ though he translates<ref name=fx5_ve1_376> ''Ibid.,'' 776.</ref> the parallel word '''[[आस्तरण|Āstaraṇa]]''' in another passage<ref name=fx6_ve1_376> xv. 3, 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 403;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 155.</ref> by ‘cushion.’ 

उप-स्ति
<u>'''Upa-sti'''</u> denotes both in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_377> x. 97, 23 (= Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xii. 101;<br> Av. vi. 15, 1).</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_377> iii. 5, 6.</ref> a ‘dependent,’ just as later in the Epic<ref name=fx3_ve1_377> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 92.</ref> the subordination of the [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] to the two superior castes is expressed by the verb ''upa-sthā,'' ‘stand under,’ ‘support.’ The word also appears, with the same sense, in the form of Sti, but only in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx4_ve1_377> vii. 19, 11;<br> x. 148, 4;<br> ''sti-pa,'' vii. 66, 3;<br> x. 69, 4.</ref> The exact nature of the dependence connoted by the term is quite uncertain. Zimmer<ref name=fx5_ve1_377> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 184, 185.</ref> conjectures that the ‘dependents’ were the members of defeated Aryan tribes who became clients of the king, as among the Greeks, Romans, and Germans, the term possibly including persons who had lost their freedom through dicing.<ref name=fx6_ve1_377> Rv. x. 34.</ref> The evidence of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx7_ve1_377> Av. iii. 5, 6. 7.</ref> shows that among the Upastis were included the chariot-makers (''[[रथ-कार|ratha-kāra]]''), the smiths (''[[तक्षन्|takṣan]]''), and the charioteers (''[[सूत|sūta]]''), and troop-leaders (''[[ग्राम|grāma]]-ṇī''), while the Rigveda passages negative the possibility of the ‘subjects’ (''sti'') being the whole people. It is therefore fair to assume that they were the clients proper of the king, not servile, but attached in a special relation to him as opposed to the ordinary population. They may well have included among them not only the classes suggested by Zimmer, but also higher elements, such as refugees from other clans, as well as ambitious men who sought advancement in the royal service. Indeed, the [[सूत|Sūta]] and the Grāmaṇī were, as such, officers of the king's household--kingmakers, not themselves kings, as they are described in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx8_ve1_377> iii. 5, 7.</ref> The use of the word in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx9_ve1_377> vii. 2, 5, 4. ''Cf.'' vi. 5, 8, 2.</ref> the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx10_ve1_377> iii. 3, 5, 4.</ref> and the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]],<ref name=fx11_ve1_377> xxxi. 9.</ref> is purely metaphorical, as well as in the one passage of the Rigveda in which it occurs. In the Paippalāda recension of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx12_ve1_377> iii. 5, 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 246;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 92;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 196 ''et seq.''</ref> [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]], [[शूद्र|Śūdra]], and [[आर्य|Ārya]] are referred to as Upastis, perhaps in the general sense of ‘subject.’ 

उप-स्तुत
<u>'''Upa-stuta'''</u> is mentioned several times in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_378> i. 36, 10. 17;<br> 112, 15;<br> viii. 5, 25;<br> x. 115, 8.</ref> always as a sage of old, and usually in connexion with [[कण्व|Kaṇva]], who was aided or favoured by Agni, the Aśvins, and other gods. The Upastutas, sons of [[वृष्टिहव्य|Vṛṣṭihavya]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_378> x. 115, 9.</ref> are mentioned as singers<ref name=fx3_ve1_378> viii. 103, 8;<br> x. 115, 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 108;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 152, 153.</ref>

उप-ह्वर
<u>'''Upa-hvara'''</u> denotes, in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_379> i. 87, 2.</ref> according to Geldner,<ref name=fx2_ve1_379> ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 40.</ref> the body of a chariot (''upa-stha'').

उपानस
<u>'''Upānasa'''</u> is in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_380> ii. 14, 2.</ref> opposed to '''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]],''' and must mean something like ‘the body of the wagon,’ though Sāyaṇa suggests that it signifies either a ‘granary’ or a ‘wagon full of grain.’ In the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_380> x. 105, 4.</ref> where the word occurs only once, its sense is doubtful. Pischel<ref name=fx3_ve1_380> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 197.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 301;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 56.</ref> explains the form which occurs there not as an adjective, but as an infinitive.

उपा-नह्
<u>'''Upā-nah'''</u> is the regular word for a ‘sandal’ or ‘shoe’ from the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_381> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 4, 4, 4;<br> 6, 6, 1, etc.</ref> onwards. Boarskin is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_381> v. 4, 3, 19.</ref> as a material of which shoes were made. The combination ‘staff and sandals’ (''daṇḍopānaha'') occurs as early as the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_381> iii. 3.</ref>

उपावि जान-श्रुतेय
<u>'''Upāvi [[जान|Jāna]]-śruteya'''</u> is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 25, 15) as an authority on the Upasads (a kind of Soma ceremony).<br>==Foot Notes==

उपोदिति गौपालेय
<u>'''Upoditi Gaupāleya'''</u> is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xii. 13, 11) as a seer of Sāmans.<br>==Foot Notes==

उभया-दन्त्
<u>'''Ubhayā-dant,'''</u> ‘having incisors in both jaws,’ is an expression employed to distinguish, among domestic animals, the horse,  the ass, etc., from the goat, the sheep, and cattle. The distinction occurs in a late hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_384> x. 90, 10.</ref> and is several times alluded to in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx2_ve1_384> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 6, 3;<br> v. 1, 2, 6;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 8, 1.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx3_ve1_384> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 30 (''ubhayato-dant'').</ref> In one passage of the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx4_ve1_384> ii. 2, 6, 3.</ref> man is classed with the horse as ''[[उभया-दन्त्|ubhayā-dant]].'' The opposite is ''anyato-dant,'' ‘having incisors in one jaw only,’ a term regularly applied to cattle,<ref name=fx5_ve1_384> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 1, 5;<br> v. 1, 2, 6;<br> 5, 1, 3.</ref> the eight incisors of which are, in fact, limited to the lower jaw. The ass is styled ''[[उभया-दन्त्|ubhayā-dant]]'' in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx6_ve1_384> v. 31, 3.</ref> In one passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx7_ve1_384> v. 19, 2.</ref> however, the epithet is applied to a ram; but the sense here is that a marvel occurs, just as in the Rigveda<ref name=fx8_ve1_384> viii. 18, 17.</ref> a ram destroys a lioness. Bloomfield<ref name=fx9_ve1_384> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 434.</ref> suggests in the Atharvaveda passage another reading which would mean ‘horse.’ A parallel division of animals is that of the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]]<ref name=fx10_ve1_384> iv. 3, 10, 2.</ref> and Vājasaneyi Saṃhitās<ref name=fx11_ve1_384> xiv. 30.</ref> into ‘whole-hoofed’ (''eka-[[शफ|śapha]]'') and ‘small’ (''kṣudra'').<br><br>Zimmer<ref name=fx12_ve1_384> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 74-76.</ref> seeks to show from the Greek <ref name=fx13_ve1_384> Aristotle, ''Hist. An.,'' ii. 1, 8.</ref> and the Latin ''ambidens''<ref name=fx14_ve1_384> Festus ''apud'' Paulum Diaconum<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 58.</ref> that the Indo-European was familiar with the division of the five sacrificial animals into the two classes of man and horse on the one hand, and cattle, sheep, and goats on the other. But this supposition is not necessary.

उरा
<u>'''Urā'''</u> as a name for ‘sheep’ is confined to the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_385> viii. 34, 3.</ref> It is curious that in one of its two occurrences the wolf should be referred to as terrifying sheep, and that the epithet of the wolf, ''[[उरा|urā]]-mathi,'' ‘killing sheep,’ should occur once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_385> viii. 66, 8. ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 21.</ref> both references being in one book of the Saṃhitā, a fact which suggests a dialectical origin of the word ''[[उरा|urā]].'' See also '''Avi.''' 

उरु-कक्ष
<u>'''Uru-kakṣa'''</u> occurs in only one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_386> vi. 45, 31.</ref> where the sense of the word is much disputed. The reading of the text is ''uruḥ kakṣo na gāṅgyaḥ,'' which may refer to a man, [[उरुकक्ष|Urukakṣa]], ‘dwelling on the Ganges,’<ref name=fx2_ve1_386> Grassmann;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' 291.</ref> or to a man, son of [[गङ्गा|Gaṅgā]], or to a wood so called,<ref name=fx3_ve1_386> Ludwig's translation (''der wald [[उरुकक्ष|Urukakṣa]],'' or ''das weite dickicht'').</ref> or may simply denote the ‘broad thicket on the Ganges.’<ref name=fx4_ve1_386> Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 28, n. 5;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 396.</ref>

उरु-क्षय
<u>'''Uru-kṣaya.'''</u>--A family of Urukṣayas, singers and worshippers of Agni, is referred to in one hymn of the Rigveda (x. 118, 8. 9).<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 167.<br>==Foot Notes==

उरुञ्जिरा
<u>'''Uruñjirā'''</u> is given in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (ix. 26) as one of the names of the river '''[[विपाश्|Vipāś]]''' (now Beäs).<br>==Foot Notes==

उर्वरा
<u>'''Urvarā'''</u> is with '''[[क्षेत्र|Kṣetra]]''' the regular expression, from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_389> i. 127, 6;<br> iv. 41, 6;<br> v. 33, 4;<br> vi. 25, 4;<br> x. 30, 3;<br> 142, 3, etc.;<br> Av. x. 6, 33;<br> 10, 8;<br> xiv. 2, 14, etc.</ref> onwards, denoting a piece of ‘ploughland’ (). Fertile (''apnasvatī'') fields<ref name=fx2_ve1_389> Rv. i. 127, 6.</ref> are spoken of as well as waste fields (''ārtanā'').<ref name=fx3_ve1_389> ''Ibid.''</ref> Intensive cultivation by means of irrigation is clearly referred to both in the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_389> vii. 49, 2.</ref> and in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx5_ve1_389> i. 6, 4;<br> xix. 2, 2.</ref> while allusion is also made to the use of manure.<ref name=fx6_ve1_389> Av. iii. 14, 3, 4;<br> xix. 31, 3.</ref> The fields (''[[क्षेत्र|kṣetra]]'') were carefully measured according to the Rigveda.<ref name=fx7_ve1_389> i. 110, 5.</ref> This fact points clearly to individual ownership in land for the plough, a conclusion supported by the reference of Apālā, in a hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx8_ve1_389> viii. 91, 5.</ref> to her father's field (''[[उर्वरा|urvarā]]''), which is put on the same level as his head of hair as a personal possession. Consistent with this are the epithets ‘winning fields’ (''[[उर्वरा|urvarā]]-sā, [[उर्वरा|urvarā]]-jit, [[क्षेत्र|kṣetra]]-sā''),<ref name=fx9_ve1_389> Rv. iv. 38, 1, and vi. 20, 1;<br> ii. 21, 1;<br> iv. 38, 1.</ref> while ‘lord of fields’ used of a god<ref name=fx10_ve1_389> viii. 21, 3. ''Cf.'' '''[[क्षेत्र|Kṣetra]].'''</ref> is presumably a transfer of a human epithet (''[[उर्वरा|urvarā]]-pati''). Moreover, fields are spoken of in the same  connexion as children,<ref name=fx11_ve1_389> Rv. iv. 41, 6, etc.</ref> and the conquest of fields (''kṣetrāṇi saṃ-ji'') is often referred to in the Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx12_ve1_389> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 8, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, v. 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 12, 3.</ref> Very probably, as suggested by Pischel,<ref name=fx13_ve1_389> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 204-207.</ref> the ploughland was bounded by grass land (perhaps denoted by '''[[खिल|Khila]], Khilya''') which in all likelihood would be joint property on the analogy of property elsewhere. There is no trace in Vedic literature of communal property in the sense of ownership by a community of any sort,<ref name=fx14_ve1_389> ''Cf.'' Baden Powell, ''Indian Village Community'' (1899);<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 236;<br> Mrs. Rhys Davids, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1901, 860.</ref> nor is there mention of communal cultivation. Individual property in land seems also presumed later on. In the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx15_ve1_389> vii. 24, 2.</ref> the things given as examples of wealth include fields and houses (''āyatanāni''). The Greek evidence<ref name=fx16_ve1_389> ''Cf.'' Diodorus, ii. 40;<br> Arrian, ''Indica,'' 11;<br> Strabo, p. 703;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 87 ''et seq. Cf. ibid.,'' 20, 22, 23.</ref> also points to individual ownership. The precise nature of the ownership is of course not determined by the expression ‘individual ownership.’ The legal relationship of the head of a family and its members is nowhere explained, and can only be conjectured (see '''[[पितृ|Pitṛ]]'''). Very often a family may have lived together with undivided shares in the land. The rules about the inheritance of landed property do not occur before the Sūtras.<ref name=fx17_ve1_389> ''Cf.'' [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xviii. 5 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 2, 3;<br> Āpastamba [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 6, 14. Of course, the rules probably go back to the earlier period, but how far it is impossible to say. With the settlement of the country, however, inheritance of land and its partition must have become inevitable.</ref> In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx18_ve1_389> xiii. 6, 2, 18;<br> 7, 1, 13. 15.</ref> the giving of land as a fee to priests is mentioned, but with reproof: land was no doubt even then a very special kind of property, not lightly to be given away or parted with.<ref name=fx19_ve1_389> It is significant that in the famous episode ([[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 9, 4) of Manu's division of his property, from which [[नाभानेदिष्ठ|Nābhānediṣṭha]] was excluded, this exclusion is made good by the son's obtaining cattle (''paśavaḥ''). It is clear that cattle, not land, was the real foundation of wealth, just as in Ireland, Italy (''cf. pecunia''), Greece, etc. Cattle could be, and were, used individually, but land was not open to a man's free disposal;<br> no doubt, at any rate, the consent of the family or the community might be required, but we are reduced to reliance on analogy in view of the silence of the texts. ''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 289;<br> Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 94-96;<br> Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 48 ''et seq.''</ref> <br><br>On the relation of the owners of land to the king and others see '''[[ग्राम|Grāma]];''' on its cultivation see '''[[कृषि|Kṛṣi]].'''

उर्वारू
<u>'''Urvārū,'''</u> f., '''Urvāruka,''' n., ‘cucumber.’ The former<ref name=fx1_ve1_390> Av. vi. 14, 2.</ref> of these words denotes the plant, the latter<ref name=fx2_ve1_390> Rv. vii. 59, 12 = Av. xiv. 1, 17 = Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 10, 4 = [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 6, 2 = Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 60.</ref> the fruit, but both are very rare. The passages all seem to refer to the fact that the stem of the plant becomes loosened when the fruit is ripe.<ref name=fx3_ve1_390> Sāyaṇa on Av. vi. 14, 2.</ref> The fruit is also called Urvāru in a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_390> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 2. 19.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 242.</ref>

उल
<u>'''Ula'''</u> is the name of some unknown wild animal, perhaps, as Whitney<ref name=fx1_ve1_391> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 669.</ref> suggests, the ‘jackal.’ It is mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_391> xii. 1, 49.</ref> and later Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx3_ve1_391> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 12, 1 (as ''[[ऊल|ūla]]'');<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 13, 12;<br> 14, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 31. ''Cf. ulala'' in [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 82.</ref> but not definitely identified by the commentators.

उल वार्ष्णि-वृद्ध
<u>'''Ula Vārṣṇi-vṛddha'''</u> is mentioned as a teacher in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

उलप
<u>'''Ulapa'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_393> x. 142, 3.</ref> is the name of a species of grass referred to in the Rigveda and the later Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx2_ve1_393> Av. vii. 66, 1. Adjectives derived from the word are ''ulapya'' (Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 45, etc.) and ''upolapa'' (Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 7, 2).</ref>

उलुक्य जान-श्रुतेय
<u>'''Ulukya [[जान|Jāna]]-śruteya'''</u> is mentioned as a teacher in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 6, 3). <br>==Foot Notes==

उलूक
<u>'''Ulūka'''</u> is the ordinary word for ‘owl’ from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_395> x. 165, 4.</ref> onwards. The bird was noted for its cry,<ref name=fx2_ve1_395> Rv. ''loc. cit.''</ref> and was deemed the harbinger of ill-fortune (''nairṛta'').<ref name=fx3_ve1_395> Av. vi. 19, 2: [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 18, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 38.</ref> Owls were offered at the horse sacrifice to the forest trees,<ref name=fx4_ve1_395> Vājasaneyi Samhitā, xxiv. 23;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14. 4.</ref> no doubt because they roosted there.

उलूखल
<u>'''Ulūkhala'''</u> is the regular expression for ‘mortar’ from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_396> i. 28, 6;<br> Av. x. 9, 26;<br> xi. 3, 3;<br> xii. 3, 13: [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 8, 7;<br> vii. 2, 1, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 4, 6, etc.</ref> onwards, occurring frequently also in the compound<ref name=fx2_ve1_396> Av. ix. 6, 15;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 1, 22</ref> Ulūkala-[[मुसल|musala]], ‘mortar and pestle.’ The exact construction of the vessel is quite unkown till we reach the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] period.

उल्का
<u>'''Ulkā'''</u> regularly denotes a meteor from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_397> iv. 4, 2;<br> x. 68, 4;<br> Av. xix. 9, 8, Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 8, etc.</ref> onwards. In the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve1_397> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 4, 19.</ref> it also signifies a ‘firebrand.’ The much rarer form Ulkuṣī<ref name=fx3_ve1_397> As ‘meteor,’ Av. v. 17, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 2, 7, 21;<br> as ‘firebrand,’ ''ibid.,'' iii. 9, 2, 9.</ref> has both senses.

उल्मुक
<u>'''Ulmuka'''</u> is the common word in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve1_398> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 11;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 2, 1;<br> ii. 1, 4, 28, etc.;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 76 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 239)</ref> for ‘firebrand,’ from which a coal (''aṅgāra'')<ref name=fx2_ve1_398> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 4, 3, 3;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 61, 1 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 23, 342).</ref> could be taken.

उल्मुकवक्षयण
<u>'''Ulmukavakṣayaṇa'''</u> is an expression that occurs several times in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_399> iv. 6. 8, 7;<br> v. 2, 4, 15;<br> xi. 6, 3, 3;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 76. ''Cf.'' Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, s.v.</ref> signifying a ‘means of extinguishing (''ava-kṣayaṇa'') a firebrand,’ or possibly more precisely ‘tongs.’ Compare '''[[अङ्गारावक्षयण|Aṅgārāvakṣayaṇa]].''' 

उशनस् काव्य
<u>'''Uśanas Kāvya'''</u> is an ancient seer, already a half-mythical figure in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_400> i. 51, 10;<br> 83. 5;<br> 121, 12;<br> iv. 16, 2;<br> vi. 20, 11;<br> viii. 23, 17;<br> ix. 87, 3;<br> 97, 7;<br> x. 40, 7;<br> probably also i. 130, 9;<br> v. 31, 8;<br> 34. 2;<br> viii. 7, 26;<br> x. 22, 6. Also in Av. iv. 29, 6.</ref> where he is often mentioned, especially as associated with [[कुत्स|Kutsa]] and Indra. Later on<ref name=fx2_ve1_400> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 8, 5: [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 5, 20;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiv. 27, 1.</ref> he becomes the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of the Asuras in their contests with the gods. A variant of his name is Kavi Uśanas.<ref name=fx3_ve1_400> Rv. iv. 26, 1.</ref> He appears in the Brāhmaṇas as a teacher also.<ref name=fx4_ve1_400> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 12, 5;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. ii. 7. 2, 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 167 ''et seq.;<br>'' Bergaingne, ''Religiou Vidique,'' 2, 339. ''et seq.;<br>'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 147.</ref>

उशना
<u>'''Uśanā'''</u> occurs in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 4, 3, 13; iv. 2, 5, 15) as the name of a plant from which Soma was prepared.<br>==Foot Notes==

उशीनर
<u>'''Uśīnara'''</u>--In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Brāhmaṇā<ref name=fx1_ve1_402> viii. 14.</ref> the Kuru-Pañcālas are mentioned as dwelling together in the ‘Middle Country’ with the Vaśas and the Uśīnaras. In the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_402> iv. 1. See Keith ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āranyaka,'' 36.</ref> also the Uśīnaras are associated with the Kuru-Pañcālas and Vaśas, but in the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_402> ii 9.</ref> the Uśīnaras and Vaśas are regarded as northerners. In the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_402> x. 59, 10.</ref> the people is alluded to in one passage by reference to their queen, Uśīnarāṇī. Zimmer<ref name=fx5_ve1_402> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 130.</ref> thinks that the Uśīnaras earlier lived farther to the north-west, but for this there is no clear evidence. His theory is based merely on the fact that the Anukramaṇī (Index) of the Rigveda ascribes one hymn<ref name=fx6_ve1_402> Rv. x. 179.</ref> to [[शिबि|Śibi]] Auśīnara, and that the Śibis were known to Alexander's followers as ,<ref name=fx7_ve1_402> Diodorus, xvii. 19.</ref> living between the Indus and the Akesines (Chenab). But this is in no way conclusive, as the Śibis, at any rate in Epic times,<ref name=fx8_ve1_402> See Pargiter's map. ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908. p. 322.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 213, 419;<br> Hultzsch ''Indian Antiquary,'' 34, 179.</ref> occupied the land to the north of [[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]], and there is no reason whatever to show that in the Vedic period the Uśīnaras were farther west than the ‘Middle Country.’ 

उष
<u>'''Uṣa,'''</u> ‘salt ground,’ occurs as a variant of [[ऊष|Ūṣa]] in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (i. 6, 3).<br>==Foot Notes==

उषस्त चाक्रायण
<u>'''Uṣasta Cākrāyaṇa'''</u> is mentioned as a teacher in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka (iii. 5, 1) and Chāndogya (i. 10, 1; 11, 1) Upaniṣads, the name in the latter work appearing as Uṣasti.<br>==Foot Notes==

उष्टि
<u>'''Uṣṭi, Uṣṭra.'''</u>--Both of these words, of which the former is quite rare,<ref name=fx1_ve1_405> Perhaps in Rv. x. 106, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 6, 21, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 2.</ref> must have the same sense. Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_405> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> and Aufrecht<ref name=fx3_ve1_405> Cited in Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 468. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 224.</ref> hold that in the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_405> i. 138, 2;<br> viii. 5, 37;<br> 6, 48;<br> 46, 22. 31;<br> Av. xx. 127, 2;<br> 132, 13;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 50.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx5_ve1_405> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], 1, 2, 3, 9, etc.;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 8.</ref> the sense is ‘humped bull’ or ‘buffalo,’ but the former thinks that in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx6_ve1_405> xxiv. 28. 39.</ref> the sense is doubtful, and ‘camel’ may be meant. Hopkins<ref name=fx7_ve1_405> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 83.</ref> is decidedly of opinion that the sense in every case is ‘camel.’ The animal was used as a beast of burden yoked in fours.<ref name=fx8_ve1_405> Av. xx. 127, 2;<br> Rv. viii. 6, 48.</ref>

उष्णीष
<u>'''Uṣṇīṣa'''</u> denotes the ‘turban’ worn by Vedic Indians, men and women<ref name=fx1_ve1_406> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 1;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 2, 3;<br> iv. 5, 2, 7 (used at the sacrifice to wrap the embryo in);<br> xiv. 2, 1, 8 (Indrāṇī's [[उष्णीष|Uṣṇīṣa]]), etc.;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiii. 10.</ref> alike. The Vrātya's turban is expressly referred to in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_406> xv. 2, 1.</ref> and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_406> xvii. 1, 14. ''Cf.'' xvi. 6, 13.</ref> A turban was also worn at the [[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_406> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 5, 23.</ref> and the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_406> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 4, 3.</ref> ceremonies by the king as a token of his position.

उष्यल
<u>'''Uṣyala'''</u> occurs once in the description of the couch or the bridal car in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_407> xiv. 1, 60.</ref> where it seems to mean the four ‘frame-pieces.’ The form is doubtful: ''uṣpala'' is possible.<ref name=fx2_ve1_407> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 385.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 155;<br> Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 752.</ref> 

उस्र
<u>'''Usra,'''</u> m.; '''Usrā,''' f.; '''Usrika,''' m.; '''Usriya,''' m.; '''Usriyā,''' f. All these words denote a ‘bull’ or a ‘cow,’ occurring frequently in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_408> ''Usra,'' Rv. vi. 12, 4;<br> ''usrā,'' i. 3, 8;<br> viii. 75, 8;<br> 96, 8;<br> ix. 58, 2, etc.;<br> ''usrika,'' i. 190, 5;<br> ''usriya,'' v. 58, 6 (with ''vṛṣabhaḥ'');<br> ix. 74. 3;<br> ''usriyā,'' i. 153, 4;<br> 180, 3;<br> ii. 40, 2, etc. In ix. 70, 6, ''usriya'' is applied to a calf;<br> and in ix. 68, 1;<br> 93, 2, ''usriyā'' means ‘milk.’</ref> and sometimes later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_408> ''Usrau dhūrṣāhau,'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iv. 33;<br> ''usrā,'' Av. xii. 3, 37;<br> ''usriya,'' Av. i. 12, 1;<br> ''usriyā,'' Av. ix. 4, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxv. 2. 3. In Av. v. 20, 1;<br> 28, 3, it means ‘cowhide,’ or perhaps in v. 28, 3, ‘milk.’</ref> but usually with some reference to the morning light. In some passages the sense is doubtful. See '''Go.'''

ऊर्जयन्त् औपमन्यव
<u>'''Ūrjayant Aupamanyava'''</u> is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_409> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref> as a pupil of '''[[भानुमन्त् औपमन्यव|Bhānumant Aupamanyava]].'''

ऊर्जयन्ती
<u>'''Ūrjayantī'''</u> is regarded by Ludwig<ref name=fx1_ve1_410> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 152.</ref> in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_410> ii. 13, 8.</ref> as the name of a fort, the stronghold of '''[[नार्मर|Nārmara]].''' The verse is, however, quite unintelligible.<ref name=fx3_ve1_410> Sāyaṇa makes Urjayantī a Piśācī;<br> Grassmann, the sun;<br> Roth, ''s.v. ūrjay,'' takes it adjectivally. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 199.</ref>

ऊर्जव्य
<u>'''Ūrjavya,'''</u> a word occurring only once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_411> v. 41, 20.</ref> is taken by Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_411> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 155.</ref> to be the name of a sacrificer. Roth,<ref name=fx3_ve1_411> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> however, regards the word as an adjective meaning ‘rich in strength,’ and this is the more probable interpretation.

ऊर्ण-नाभी
<u>'''Ūrṇa-nābhī,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_412> ''Ūrṇa-[[नाभि|nābhi]]'' (‘having wool in its navel’), [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 2, 5;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1, 23;<br> ''ūrṇa-vābhī'' (‘wool-spinner’), [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, viii. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 5, 1, 23;<br> ''[[ऊर्णा|ūrṇā]]-vant'' (‘possessing wool’), [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xix. 3 (in a [[मन्त्र|Mantra]]).</ref> '''Ūrṇa-vābhi, [[ऊर्णा|Ūrṇā]]-vant''' are all names of the spider in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas in allusion to the insect's spinning threads of wool, as it were. 

ऊर्णा
<u>'''Ūrṇā,'''</u> ‘wool,’ is very frequently mentioned from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_413> iv. 22, 2;<br> v. 52, 9;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 5, 1, 13: 7, 2, 10, etc.;<br> ''ūrṇāyu,'' ‘woolly,’ Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 50;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 11, 10.</ref> onwards. The [[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]] country was famous for its wool,<ref name=fx2_ve1_413> Rv., ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 210. But ''cf.'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 315.</ref> like [[गन्धार|Gandhāra]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_413> Rv. i. 126, 7.</ref> for its sheep. The term for the separate tufts was ''[[पर्वन्|parvan]]''<ref name=fx4_ve1_413> Rv. iv. 22, 10.</ref> or ''[[परुस्|parus]].''<ref name=fx5_ve1_413> Rv. ix. 15, 6.</ref> ‘Soft as wool’ (''ūrṇa-mradas'')<ref name=fx6_ve1_413> Rv. v. 5, 4;<br> x. 18, 10;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ii. 2: iv. 10;<br> xxi. 33, etc.</ref> is not a rare epithet. The sheep is called ‘woolly’ (''[[ऊर्णावती|ūrṇāvatī]]'').<ref name=fx7_ve1_413> Rv. viii. 56, 3.</ref> ‘Woollen thread’ (''[[ऊर्णा|ūrṇā]]-[[सूत्र|sūtra]]'') is repeatedly referred to in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx8_ve1_413> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 9;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Samhitā, xxxviii. 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 80, etc. ''Cf. [[ऊर्णा|ūrṇā]]-[[स्तुका|stukā]],'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 28;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxv. 3.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx9_ve1_413> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 7, 2, 11, etc.</ref> The word ''[[ऊर्णा|ūrṇā]]'' was not restricted to the sense of sheep's wool,<ref name=fx10_ve1_413> ''Cf. anaiḍakīr ūrṇāḥ'' (‘wool not coming from the ''eḍaha,''’ a species of sheep) in Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5 2, 15.</ref> but might denote goat's hair also.<ref name=fx11_ve1_413> ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 83, n.</ref>

ऊर्णा-वती
<u>'''Ūrṇā-vatī.'''</u>--In the hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_414> x. 75. 8.</ref> which celebrates the rivers Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_414> Translation of the Rigveda, 3. 200.</ref> finds a reference to an affluent of the Indus called [[ऊर्णावती|Ūrṇāvatī]]. This interpretation, however, seems certainly wrong. Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_414> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> renders the word merely as ‘woolly,’ and Zimmer<ref name=fx4_ve1_414> ''Altindisches Leben.'' 429.</ref> rejects Ludwig's explanation on the ground that it throws the structure of the hymn into confusion. Pischel<ref name=fx5_ve1_414> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 210.</ref> makes the word an epithet of the Indus, ‘rich in sheep.’

ऊर्दर
<u>'''Ūrdara.'''</u>--This word occurs once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_415> ii. 14, 11.</ref> when reference is made to filling Indra with Soma as one fills an  [[ऊर्दर|Ūrdara]] with grain ('''Yava'''). Sāyaṇa renders it granāry, but Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_415> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> and Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve1_415> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 238.</ref> seem more correct in simply making it a measure for holding grain, or ‘garner.’

ऊल
<u>'''Ūla'''</u> is a variant of '''Ula.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

ऊष
<u>'''Ūṣa'''</u> in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_417> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 3, 2, etc.</ref> and Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve1_417> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 27;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2, 1, 16, etc.</ref> denotes salt ground suited for cattle. ''Cf.'' '''[[उष|Uṣa]].'''

ऋक्ष
<u>'''1. Ṛkṣa,'''</u> ‘bear,’ is found only once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_418> v. 56, 3.</ref> and seldom later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_418> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 17;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 36;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 184. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 81.</ref> the animal having evidently been scarce in the regions occupied by the Vedic Indians. Not more frequent<ref name=fx3_ve1_418> Rv. i. 24, 10;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. ii. 1, 2, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 11, 2. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 422.</ref> is the use of the word in the plural to denote the ‘seven bears,’ later called the ‘seven [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]],’<ref name=fx4_ve1_418> ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 144 (D).</ref> the constellation of the ‘Great Bear’ (, ''ursa'').

ऋक्ष
<u>'''2. Ṛkṣa'''</u> is the name of a patron mentioned in one verse of a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’) in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_419> viii. 68, 15. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 163.</ref> his son being referred to in the next verse as '''[[आर्क्ष|Ārkṣa]].'''

ऋक्षाका
<u>'''Ṛkṣākā'''</u> is a word occurring once in an obscure passage of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_420> xviii. 2, 31.</ref> The sense is quite unknown. Weber<ref name=fx2_ve1_420> ''Festgruss an Roth,'' 138, n. 2;<br> Berlin Catalogue, 2, 59, 11.;<br> ''Proccedings of the Berlin Academy,'' 1895, 856.</ref> thinks it refers to the ‘milky way,’ but his view rests on no evidence. Whitney<ref name=fx3_ve1_420> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 840.</ref> despairs of the passage. 

ऋक्षीका
<u>'''Ṛkṣīkā,'''</u> a word found in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_421> xii. 1, 49.</ref> the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve1_421> xxx. 8.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_421> xiii. 2, 4, 2. 4. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 307.</ref> appears to denote a demon. Harisvāmin, however, in his commentary on the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], connects the word with '''[[ऋक्ष|Ṛkṣa]],''' as meaning ‘bear.’

ऋग्-वेद
<u>'''Ṛg-veda,'''</u> the formal name of the collection of Ṛcs, first appears in the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx1_ve1_422> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 32, and implied in [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 12, 9, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 5, 4, 6;<br> 8, 3;<br> xii. 3, 4, 9.</ref> and thereafter frequently in the Āraṇyakas<ref name=fx2_ve1_422> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 3. 5;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, viii. 3. 8.</ref> and Upaniṣads.<ref name=fx3_ve1_422> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 5, 12;<br> ii. 4, 10;<br> iv. 1, 6;<br> 5, 11;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 3, 7;<br> iii. 1, 2. 3;<br> 15, 7;<br> vii. 1, 2. 4;<br> 2, 1;<br> 7, 1.</ref>

ऋजिश्वन्
<u>'''Ṛjiśvan'''</u> is mentioned several times in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_423> i. 51, 5;<br> 53, 8;<br> 101, 1;<br> vi. 20, 7;<br> viii. 49, 10;<br> x. 99, 11;<br> 138, 3.</ref> but always in a vague manner, as if very ancient. He assists Indra in fights against demoniac figures like [[पिप्रु|Pipru]] and the dusky brood (''[[कृष्ण|kṛṣṇa]]-garbhāḥ''). According to Ludwig,<ref name=fx2_ve1_423> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 143, 149.</ref> he was called Auśija's son,<ref name=fx3_ve1_423> Rv. x. 99, 11. ''Cf.'' '''[[औशिज|Auśija]].'''</ref> but this is doubtful. He is twice<ref name=fx4_ve1_423> Rv. iv. 16, 13;<br> v. 29, 11. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 161 (C).</ref> clearly called [[वैदथिन|Vaidathina]], or descendant of Vidathin.

ऋजूनस्
<u>'''Ṛjūnas'''</u> is mentioned once only in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_424> viii. 52, 2. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 163.</ref> along with six other Soma sacrificers.

ऋज्राश्व
<u>'''Ṛjrāśva'''</u> appears in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_425> i. 100, 16. 17.</ref> as one of the '''Vārṣāgiras,''' along with '''[[अम्बरीष|Ambarīṣa]], [[सुराधस्|Surādhas]], [[सहदेव|Sahadeva]],''' and '''[[भयमान|Bhayamāna]],''' and as apparently victorious in a race. Elsewhere<ref name=fx2_ve1_425> i. 116, 17;<br> 117, 16. 17.</ref> in the  Rigveda he is celebrated as having been blinded by his father for slaying one hundred rams for a she-wolf, and as having been restored to sight by the Aśvins, a legend of quite obscure meaning.<br><br>''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 52.

ऋण
<u>'''Ṛṇa,'''</u> ‘debt,’ is repeatedly mentioned from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_426> ii. 27, 4, etc., usually in a metaphorical sense.</ref> onwards, having apparently been a normal condition among the Vedic Indians. Reference is often made<ref name=fx2_ve1_426> Rv. x. 34, 10;<br> Av. vi. 119, 1.</ref> to debts contracted at dicing. To pay off a debt was called ''ṛṇaṃ saṃ-nī.''<ref name=fx3_ve1_426> Rv. viii. 47, 17 = Av. vi. 46, 3.</ref> Allusion is made to debt contracted without intention of payment.<ref name=fx4_ve1_426> Av. vi. 119, 1.</ref><br><br>The result of non-payment of a debt might be very serious: the dicer might fall into slavery.<ref name=fx5_ve1_426> Rv. x. 34. ''Cf.'' Lüders, ''Das Wūrfelspiel im alten Indien,'' 61.</ref> Debtors, like other malefactors, such as thieves, were frequently bound by their creditors to posts (''[[द्रु-पद|dru-pada]]''),<ref name=fx6_ve1_426> Rv. x. 34, 4, seems to refer rather to the binding and taking away as a slave, though Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 228, explains it as the binding of a debtor for non-payment, interpreting the obscure verse i. 169, 7, in the same way. But Av. vi. 115, 2, 3, may refer to debt, and if this is the meaning the allusion to binding to a post as a punishment is clear. See, however, Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 528, n. 1;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 364, who interprets the hymn as referring only to sin. Rv. i. 24, 13. 15;<br> Av. vi. 63, 3 = 84, 4;<br> 121, 1 ''et seq.,'' are general;<br> while Rv. vii. 86, 5;<br> Av. xix. 47, 9;<br> 50, 1, refer to the binding of thieves in the stocks. ''Cf.'' '''[[तस्कर|Taskara]].'''</ref> presumably as a means of putting pressure on them or their friends to pay up the debt.<br><br>The amount of interest payable is impossible to make out. In one passage of the Rigveda and Atharvaveda<ref name=fx7_ve1_426> Rv. viii. 47, 17 = Av. vi. 46, 3.</ref> an eighth (''[[शफ|śapha]]'') and a sixteenth (''[[कला|kalā]]'') are mentioned as paid, but it is quite uncertain whether interest or an instalment of the principal is meant. Presumably the interest would be paid in kind.<br><br>How far a debt was a heritable interest or obligation does not appear. The [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx8_ve1_426> xlvi. 36-40. See Caland, ''Altindisches Zauberritual,'' 154;<br> Bloomfield, ''op. cit.,'' 528.</ref> regards three hymns of the  Atharvaveda<ref name=fx9_ve1_426> vi. 117-119. The name for unpaid debt is in Av. vi. 117, 1, ''apamityam apratītam.'' In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 3, 8, 1, ''kusīdam apratīttam;<br>'' in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 14, 17, and [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 3, 1, 8, ''kusīdam apratītam;<br>'' in the [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 3. 20, ''apradattam.''</ref> as applicable to the occasion of the payment of a debt after the creditor's decease. For the payment of a debt. by a relation of the debtor the evidence is still less clear.<ref name=fx10_ve1_426> ''Cf.'' Rv. iv. 3, 13 (a brother's sin or debt);<br> Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 99, 100.</ref><br><br>Zimmer<ref name=fx11_ve1_426> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 181. This suggestion is ignored by Bloomfield, ''op. cit.,'' 375, and Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 304.</ref> thinks that payments of debt were made in the presence of witnesses who could be appealed to in case of dispute. This conclusion is, however, very uncertain, resting solely on a vague verse in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx12_ve1_426> vi. 32, 3 = viii. 8, 21. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 14, and see [[ज्ञातृ|Jñātṛ]].<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 181, 182;<br> 259.</ref>

ऋणं-चय
<u>'''Ṛṇaṃ-caya,'''</u> a prince of the '''Ruśamas,''' is celebrated in a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’) of the Rigveda (v. 30, 12. 14) for his generosity to a poet named '''[[बभ्रु|Babhru]].'''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 129; Bṛhadevatā, ed. Macdonell, 2, 169, 174.<br>==Foot Notes==

ऋतु
<u>'''Ṛtu,'''</u> ‘season,’ is a term repeatedly mentioned from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_428> i. 49, 3;<br> 84, 18, etc.</ref> onwards, Three seasons of the year are often alluded to,<ref name=fx2_ve1_428> ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 164, 2 (''tri-[[नाभि|nābhi]]''), 48 (''trīṇi nabhyāni'');<br> also perhaps the Ṛbhus as the genii of the three seasons and the three dawns. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 133;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 33 ''et seq.:'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1, 1, 28, and the ''cāturmāsyāni,'' or four-monthly sacrifices performed at the beginning of the seasons in the ritual (Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 329 ''et seq.'').</ref> but the names are not usually specified. In one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_428> x. 90, 6. Hillebrandt, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 35, finds in Rv. v. 14, 4: ix. 91, 6, reference to three seasons in the triad ''gāvaḥ'' (? spring), ''āpaḥ'' (rains), ''svar (= [[घर्म|gharma]]),'' and in the ritual literature (Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 4, 2) in the threefold division into ''ṛta, [[घर्म|gharma]],'' and ''[[ओषधि|oṣadhi]].''</ref> spring (''[[वसन्त|vasanta]]''), summer (''[[ग्रीष्म|grīṣma]]''), and autumn (''[[शरद्|śarad]]'') are given. The Rigveda knows also the rainy season (''[[प्रा-वृष्|prā-vṛṣ]]'') and the winter (''[[हिमा|himā]], [[हेमन्त|hemanta]]''). A more usual<ref name=fx4_ve1_428> Av. viii. 2, 22;<br> 9, 15;<br> xiii. 1, 18;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 2, 3;<br> iv. 3, 3, 1. 2;<br> v. 1, 10, 3;<br> 3, 1, 2;<br> 4. 12, 2;<br> 6. 10, 1;<br> 7, 2, 4;<br> vii. 1, 18, 1. 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 7, 3;<br> iii. 4, 8;<br> 13, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, iv. 14;<br> ix. 16;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 10-14;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 5, 11;<br> vi. 2, 2, 3. etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 10, 4, 1;<br> 11, 10, 4, etc. ''Cf.'' Rv. i, 164, 13. See also Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 352.</ref> division (not found in the Rigveda) is into five seasons,  ''[[वसन्त|vasanta]], [[ग्रीष्म|grīṣma]], varṣā, [[शरद्|śarad]], hemama-siśira,'' but occasionally the five are otherwise divided, ''varṣā-[[शरद्|śarad]]'' being made one season.<ref name=fx5_ve1_428> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 6, 1, 10. 11.</ref> Sometimes six<ref name=fx6_ve1_428> Av. vi. 55, 2;<br> xii. 1, 36;<br> Taittīrīya Saṃhitā, v. 1, 5, 2;<br> 7, 3;<br> 2. 6, 1, etc.;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 7, 3;<br> iii. 11, 12;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, viii. 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxi. 23-28;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 2, 21;<br> ii. 4, 2, 24;<br> xii. 8, 2, 34;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 19, etc. ''Cf.'' also Rv. i. 23, 15, as interpreted by Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. indu.''</ref> seasons are reckoned, ''[[हेमन्त|hemanta]]'' and ''[[शिशिर|śiśira]]'' being divided, so that the six seasons can be made parallel to the twelve months of the year. A still more artificial arrangement<ref name=fx7_ve1_428> Av. vi. 61, 2;<br> viii. 9, 18;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 5, 1, 15;<br> ix. 1, 2, 31;<br> 2, 3, 45;<br> 3, 1, 19;<br> 5, 2, 8;<br> perhaps Av. iv. 11, 9, and ''of.'' Rv. i. 164. 1.</ref> makes the seasons seven, possibly by reckoning the intercalary month as a season, as Weber and Zimmer<ref name=fx8_ve1_428> ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 44;<br> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 374.</ref> hold, or more probably because of the predilection for the number seven, as Roth<ref name=fx9_ve1_428> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. [[ऋतु|ṛtu]]. Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Religions of India,'' 18, 33.</ref> suggests. Occasionally the word ''[[ऋतु|ṛtu]]'' is applied to the months.<ref name=fx10_ve1_428> Av. xv. 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 4, 11, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 25;<br> xiv. 6. 15. 26. 27;<br> xv. 57, etc.</ref> The last season, according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx11_ve1_428> i. 5. 3. 13.</ref> is ''[[हेमन्त|hemanta]].''<br><br>The growth of the division of the seasons from three to five is rightly explained by Zimmer<ref name=fx12_ve1_428> ''Op. cit.,'' 373.</ref> as indicating the advance of the Vedic Indians towards the east. It is not Rigvedic, but dominates the later Saṃhitās. Traces of an earlier division of the year into winter and summer do not appear clearly in the Rigveda, where the appropriate words ''[[हिमा|himā]]'' and ''[[समा|samā]]'' are merely general appellations of the year, and where ''[[शरद्|śarad]]''<ref name=fx13_ve1_428> Hopkins, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 15, 159, 160: Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 232;<br> Bühler, ''Zcitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 41, 28.</ref> is commoner than either as a designation of the year, because it denotes the harvest, a time of overwhelming importance to a young agricultural people. The division of the year in one passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx14_ve1_428> viii. 9, 17. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, 372.</ref> into two periods of six months is merely formal, and in no way an indication of old tradition. 

ऋतु-पर्ण
<u>'''Ṛtu-parṇa'''</u> appears in a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]-like passage of the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_429> xx. 12.</ref> as son of [[भङ्गाश्विन|Bhaṅgāśvina]] and king of [[शफाल|Śaphāla]]. In the Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_429> xxi. 20, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Caland, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 57, 745.</ref> are mentioned [[ऋतुपर्ण|Ṛtuparṇa]]-Kayovadhī Bhaṅgyaśvinau.

ऋत्व्-इज्
<u>'''Ṛtv-ij'''</u> is the regular term for ‘sacrificial priest,’ covering all the different kinds of priests employed at the sacrifice. It appears certain that all the priests were Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve1_430> This is assumed throughout the Vedic texts, and is accompanied by the rule that no [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] can eat of the sacrificial offering (''Cf.'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 26): no doubt because only the Brāhmaṇas were sufficiently holy to receive the divine essence of the sacrifice into which, by partaking of it, the deity has entered in part.</ref> The number of priests officiating at a sacrifice with different functions was almost certainly seven. The oldest list, occurring in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_430> ii. 1, 2. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg. ''Rdigion des Veda,'' 383.</ref> enumerates their names as [[होतृ|Hotṛ]], [[पोतृ|Potṛ]], [[नेष्टृ|Neṣṭṛ]], Agnīdh, [[प्रशास्तृ|Praśāstṛ]], [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]], [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], besides the institutor of the sacrifice. The number of seven probably explains the phrase ‘seven Hotṛs’ occurring so frequently in the Rigveda, and is most likely connected with that of the mythical ‘seven [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]].’ It may be compared with the eight of Iran.<ref name=fx3_ve1_430> Darmesteter, ''Le Zend-Avesta,'' 1, lxx ''et seq.''</ref> The chief of the seven priests was the [[होतृ|Hotṛ]], who was the singer of the hymns, and in the early times their composer also. The [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]] performed the practical work of the sacrifice, and accompanied his performance with muttered formulas of prayer and deprecation of evil. His chief assistance was derived from the Agnīdh, the two performing the smaller sacrifices without other help in practical matters. The [[प्रशास्तृ|Praśāstṛ]], Upavaktṛ, or Maitrāvaruṇa, as he was variously called, appeared only in the greater sacrifices as giving instructions to the [[होतृ|Hotṛ]], and as entrusted with certain litanies. The [[पोतृ|Potṛ]], [[नेष्टृ|Neṣṭṛ]], and [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] belonged to the ritual of the Soma sacrifice, the latter being later styled [[ब्राह्मणाच्छंसिन्|Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin]] to distinguish him from the priest who in the later  ritual acted as supervisor. Other priests referred to in the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_430> Rv. viii. 81. 5.</ref> are the singers of Sāmans or chants, the Udgātṛ and his assistant the [[प्रस्तोतृ|Prastotṛ]], while the [[प्रतिहर्तृ|Pratihartṛ]], another assistant, though not mentioned, may quite well have been known. Their functions undoubtedly represent a later stage of the ritual, the development of the elaborate series of sacrificial calls on the one hand, and on the other the use of long hymns addressed to the Soma plant. Other priests, such as the Achāvāka,<ref name=fx5_ve1_430> ''Cf.,'' for the Achāvāka, [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxviii. 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 14, 8, etc.;<br> Bergaigne, ''Recherches sur l'histoire de la liturgie védique,'' 47;<br> Oldenberg. ''Religion des Veda,'' 397, n. 2. The other three occur in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] and other Brāhmaṇas. See St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> the Grāvastut, the Unnetṛ, and the [[सुब्रह्मण्य|Subrahmaṇya]], were known later in the developed ritual of the Brāhmaṇas, making in all sixteen priests, who were technically and artificially classed in four groups<ref name=fx6_ve1_430> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 1, 4-6;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta Sūtras, xiii. 14, 1, etc. In the Rigveda [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] the order of the four sets is [[होतृ|Hotṛ]], [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], Udgātṛ, and [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]]. Sometimes a seventeenth priest is mentioned, but he was not usually approved, though the Kauṣītakins maintained him as the [[सदस्य|Sadasya]]. See Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 4, 1, 19;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 43, 348, n.;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 37;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 375.</ref> [[होतृ|Hotṛ]], Maitrāvaruṇa, Achāvāka, and Grāvastut; Udgātṛ, [[प्रस्तोतृ|Prastotṛ]], [[प्रतिहर्तृ|Pratihartṛ]], and [[सुब्रह्मण्य|Subrahmaṇya]]; [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]], Pratisthātṛ, [[नेष्टृ|Neṣṭṛ]], and Unnetṛ; [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], [[ब्राह्मणाच्छंसिन्|Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin]], Agnīdhra, and Petṛ.<br><br>Apart from all these priests was the '''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]],''' who was the spiritual adviser of the king in all his religious duties. Geldner<ref name=fx7_ve1_430> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 143 ''et seq.''</ref> holds that, as a rule, when the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] actually took part in one of the great sacrifices he played the part of the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], in the sense of the priest who superintended the whole conduct of the ritual. He sees evidence for this view in a considerable number of passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx8_ve1_430> Rv. i. 44, 10;<br> 94, 6;<br> viii. 27, 1, etc.</ref> and the later literature,<ref name=fx9_ve1_430> [[बृहस्पति|Bṛhaspati]] is [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of the gods, Rv. ii. 24, 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 1, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 17, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 1, 2;<br> but [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] in Rv. x. 141, 3;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 13;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 4, 21. [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] is [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], Rv. x. 150, 5, of [[सुदास्|Sudās]] [[पैजवन|Paijavana]], [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 11, 4;<br> but [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] of the Sunaḥśepa sacrifice, ''ibid,'' xv. 21.</ref> where [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] and [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] were combined or identified. Oldenberg,<ref name=fx10_ve1_430> ''Op. cit.,'' 380 ''et seq.''</ref> however, more correctly points out  that in the earlier period this was not the case: the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] was then normally the [[होतृ|Hotṛ]], the singer of the most important of the songs; it was only later that the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], who in the capacity of overseer of the rite is not known to the Rigveda, acquired the function of general supervision hitherto exercised by the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], who was ''ex officio'' skilled in the use of magic and in guarding the king by spells which could also be applied to guarding the sacrifice from evil demons. With this agrees the fact that Agni, pre-eminently<ref name=fx11_ve1_430> Agni as [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] and [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] occurs in Rv. i. 1, 1;<br> iii. 3, 2;<br> 11, 1;<br> v. 11, 2. His Purohitaship is described in terms characteristic of the Hotṛ's funcitons in Rv. viii. 27, 1;<br> x. 1, 6. Devāpi is [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] and [[होतृ|Hotṛ]]. Rv. x. 98.</ref> the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of men, is also a [[होतृ|Hotṛ]], and that the two divine Hotṛs of the Āprī hymns are called<ref name=fx12_ve1_430> Rv. x. 66, 13;<br> in x. 70, 7, ''purohitāv ṛtvijā.''</ref> the divine Purohitas. On the other hand, the rule is explicitly recognized in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx13_ve1_430> vii. 26.</ref> that a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] should have a [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] as a [[पुरोहित|Purohita]]; and in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx14_ve1_430> iii. 5, 2, 1, etc.</ref> the [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] family have a special claim to the office of [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]]-[[पुरोहित|Purohita]], perhaps an indication that it was they who first as Purohitas exchanged the function of Hotṛs for that of Brahmans in the sacrificial ritual.<br><br>The sacrifices were performed for an individual in the great majority of cases. The Sattra,<ref name=fx15_ve1_430> Oldenberg, 371.</ref> or prolonged sacrificial session, was, however, performed for the common benefit of the priests taking part in it, though its advantageous results could only be secured if all the members actually engaged were consecrated (''dīkṣita''). Sacrifices for a people as such were unknown. The sacrifice for the king was, it is true, intended to bring about the prosperity of his people also; but it is characteristic that the prayer<ref name=fx16_ve1_430> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 22;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 18;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 12, 6;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 14, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 141 ''et seq.;<br>'' 376 ''et seq.;<br>'' Hillebrandt, ''Rituallitteratur,'' 97;<br> Oldenberg, ''op. cit.,'' 370397;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 224.</ref> for welfare includes by name only the priest and the king, referring to the people indirectly in connexion with the prosperity of their cattle and agriculture. 

ऋश्य
<u>'''Ṛśya'''</u>--This is the correct<ref name=fx1_ve1_431> It appears in Av. iv. 4. 7, as Ṛśa;<br> as Ṛṣya in Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 9. 18.</ref> spelling of a word that occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_431> viii. 4, 10.</ref> and the later literature<ref name=fx3_ve1_431> Av. iv. 4. 5. 7;<br> v. 14, 3;<br> i. 18. 4 (''[[ऋश्य|ṛśya]]-pad'');<br> Vājasaneyi Samhitā, xxiv. 27.37;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 33;<br> citation in [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 25, 8, etc.</ref> meaning ‘stag,’ the feminine being '''[[रोहित्|Rohit]].'''<ref name=fx4_ve1_431> Av. iv. 4, 7.</ref> Apparently deer were caught in pits (''[[ऋश्य|ṛśya]]-da'').<ref name=fx5_ve1_431> Rv. x. 39, 8.</ref> The procreative power of the stag (''ārśya vṛṣṇya'') was celebrated.<ref name=fx6_ve1_431> Av. iv. 4, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 18;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 82;<br> Whitney. Translation of the Atharvaveda, 150, 151.</ref>

ऋषभ
<u>'''1. Ṛṣabha'''</u> is the common name of the ‘bull’ from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_432> vi. 16, 47;<br> 28, 8;<br> x. 91, 14, etc.</ref> onwards.<ref name=fx2_ve1_432> Av. iii. 6, 4;<br> 23, 4, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 3, 2, etc.;<br> vajasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxi. 22, etc.;<br> Pañcavimśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 18, etc.</ref> See also '''Go.'''

ऋषभ
<u>'''2. Ṛṣabha,'''</u> king of the Śviknas, appears in the Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_433> xiii. 5, 4, 15. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 9. 8-10.</ref> with the patronymic [[याज्ञतुर|Yājñatura]], as one of those who performed an [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] or horse sacrifice. He is also mentioned there<ref name=fx2_ve1_433> xii. 8, 3. 7.</ref> as having probably been the source of a saying of '''Gaurīviti Śāktya's.'''

ऋषभ
<u>'''3. Ṛṣabha'''</u> is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 17) as a son of [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]].<br>==Foot Notes==

ऋषि
<u>'''Ṛṣi,'''</u> ‘seer,’ is primarily a composer of hymns to the gods. In the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_435> i. 1, 2;<br> 45, 3;<br> viii. 43, 13, etc.</ref> reference is often made to previous singers and to contemporary poets. Old poems were inherited and refurbished by members of the composer's family,<ref name=fx2_ve1_435> i. 89, 3;<br> 96, 2;<br> iii. 39, 2;<br> viii. 6. 11. 43;<br> 76, 6, etc.</ref> but the great aim of the singers was to produce new and approved hymns.<ref name=fx3_ve1_435> i. 109, 2;<br> ii. 18, 3;<br> iii. 62, 7;<br> vi. 50, 6;<br> vii. 14, 4;<br> 93, 1;<br> viii. 23, 14, etc.</ref> It is not till the time of the Brāhmaṇas that the  composition of hymns appears to have fallen into disuse,<ref name=fx4_ve1_435> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 151.</ref> though poetry was still produced, for example, in the form of '''Gāthās,''' which the priests were required to compose themselves<ref name=fx5_ve1_435> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 2, 8;<br> 3, 5.</ref> and sing to the accompaniment of the lute at the sacrifice. The [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] was the most exalted of Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx6_ve1_435> Rv. ix. 96, 6, etc. ''Cf.'' Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 4, 4, 6, where preeminence is assigned to a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] descended from a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]].</ref> and his skill, which is often compared with that of a carpenter,<ref name=fx7_ve1_435> Rv. i. 130, 6;<br> v. 2, 11;<br> 29, 15;<br> 73, 10;<br> x. 39, 14. So a poet is a [[कारु|Kāru]](if from ''kṛ,'' ‘make,’ but usually derived from ''kṛ,'' ‘commemorate’), and makes (''kṛ,'' Rv. ii. 39. 8;<br> viii. 62, 4) as well as creates (''jan,'' Rv. vii. 15, 4;<br> viii. 88, 4) hymns.</ref> was regarded as heaven-sent.<ref name=fx8_ve1_435> Rv. i. 37, 4;<br> vii. 36. 1. 9;<br> viii. 32, 27;<br> 57. 6, etc.</ref> The [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], whether as [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] or as [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] (see '''[[ऋत्व्इज्|Ṛtvij]]'''), was a singer.<ref name=fx9_ve1_435> Rv. i. 151, 7;<br> Geldner, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 153;<br> Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 380.</ref> No doubt the [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]] were normally<ref name=fx10_ve1_435> Geldner, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 154, cites the Dānastutis as characteristic of princes in the tradition of the Bṛhaddevatā, etc.</ref> attached to the houses of the great, the petty kings of Vedic times, or the nobles of the royal household. Nor need it be doubted that occasionally<ref name=fx11_ve1_435> ''Ibid.,'' 154.</ref> the princes themselves essayed poetry: a [[राजन्यर्षि|Rājanyarṣi]], the prototype of the later Rājarṣi or ‘royal seer,’ who appears in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx12_ve1_435> xii. 12, 6, etc.</ref> though he must be mythical as Oldenberg<ref name=fx13_ve1_435> ''Zeitschrift dev Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 45, 235. n. 3.</ref> points out, indicates that kings cultivated poetry<ref name=fx14_ve1_435> Later on it was deemed quite normal and natural. See the story of [[रथवीति दार्भ्य|Rathavīti Dārbhya]], or [[दाल्भ्य|Dālbhya]], himself a royal seer, and [[तरन्त|Taranta]] and [[पुरुमीळ्ह|Purumīḷha]], seers and also kings, in Bṛhaddevata, v. 50 ''et seq.''</ref> just as later they engaged in philosophic disputations.<ref name=fx15_ve1_435> ''Cf.'' Garbe, ''Philosophy of Ancient India,'' 73 ''et seq.;<br>'' Deussen, ''Philosophy of the Upaniṣads,'' 16 ''et seq.;<br>'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 50.</ref> Normally, however, the poetical function is Brahminical, Viśāmitra and others not being kings, but merely Brāhmaṇas, in the Rigveda.<br><br>In the later literature the [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]] are the poets of the hymns preserved in the Saṃhitās. a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] being regularly<ref name=fx16_ve1_435> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 25;<br> viii. 26;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 4, 4;<br> ii. 2, 3, 6;<br> 5, 1, 4;<br> vi, 1, 1, 1, etc.;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vii. 3, etc.</ref> cited when a Vedic Saṃhitā is quoted. Moreover, the [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]] become the representatives of a sacred past, and are regarded as holy sages,  whose deeds are narrated as if they were the deeds of gods or Asuras.<ref name=fx17_ve1_435> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 17;<br> ii. 19;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 2, 7, etc.</ref> They are typified by a particular group of seven,<ref name=fx18_ve1_435> ''Cf. Indische Studien,'' 8, 167.</ref> mentioned four times in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx19_ve1_435> iv. 42, 8;<br> x. 109, 4;<br> 130, 7;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 144.</ref> several times in the later Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx20_ve1_435> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiv. 24;<br> Av xi. 1, 1. 24;<br> xii. 1, 39, etc.</ref> and enumerated in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx21_ve1_435> ii. 2, 6.</ref> as [[गोतम|Gotama]], [[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]], [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]], [[जमद्अग्नि|Jamadagni]], [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]], [[कश्यप|Kaśyapa]], and Atri. In the Rigveda itself [[कुत्स|Kutsa]],<ref name=fx22_ve1_435> i. 106, 6.</ref> Atri,<ref name=fx23_ve1_435> i. 117, 3.</ref> [[रेभ|Rebha]],<ref name=fx24_ve1_435> i. 117, 4.</ref> [[अगस्त्य|Agastya]],<ref name=fx25_ve1_435> i. 179, 6.</ref> the Kuśikas,<ref name=fx26_ve1_435> iii. 53. 10.</ref> [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]],<ref name=fx27_ve1_435> vii. 33. 13.</ref> [[व्य्अश्व|Vyaśva]],<ref name=fx28_ve1_435> viii. 23, 16.</ref> and others appear as [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]]; and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx29_ve1_435> iv. 29. ''Cf.'' xviii. 3, 15. 16.</ref> contains a long list, including [[अङ्गिरस्|Aṅgiras]], Agastī, [[जमद्अग्नि|Jamadagni]], Atri, [[कश्यप|Kaśyapa]], [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]], [[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]], Gaviṣṭhira, [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]], [[कुत्स|Kutsa]], [[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]], [[कण्व|Kaṇva]], [[मेधातिथि|Medhātithi]], [[त्रिशोक|Triśoka]], [[उशना|Uśanā]] [[काव्य|Kāvya]], [[गोतम|Gotama]], and [[मुद्गल|Mudgala]].<br><br>Competition among the bards appears to have been known. This is one of the sides of the riddle poetry ('''[[ब्रह्मोद्य|Brahmodya]]''') that forms a distinctive feature<ref name=fx30_ve1_435> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 345, 346;<br> Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 172;<br> ''Religion des Veda,'' 216 ''et seq.''</ref> of the Vedic ritual of the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or horse sacrifice. In the [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] period such competitions were quite frequent. The most famous was that of [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]], which was held at the court of [[जनक|Janaka]] of [[विदेह|Videha]], as detailed in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx31_ve1_435> iii. 1, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> and which was a source of annoyance to '''[[अजातशत्रु|Ajātaśatru]]''' of '''Kāśī.'''<ref name=fx32_ve1_435> ''Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],'' ii. 1, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1 ''et seq.''</ref> According to an analogous practice, a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], like '''Uddālaka Aruṇi,''' would go about disputing with all he came across, and compete with them for a prize of money.<ref name=fx33_ve1_435> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 4, 1, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3. 8 ''et seq.;<br>'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 185, 344.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 340347;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 3, 120 ''et seq.''</ref>

ऋषिस्
<u>'''Ṛṣis.'''</u>--The term ‘Seven Ṛṣis’ denotes the ‘Great Bear’ (see 1. '''[[ऋक्ष|Ṛkṣa]]''') in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_436> x. 82, 2.</ref> and occasionally  later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_436> Av vi. 40, 1 (where, however, Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 310. merely renders it as ‘seven seers,’ and appears not to take it in a technical sense);<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 2, 4;<br> xiii. 8, 1, 9;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], x. 26, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 422;<br> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 144.</ref> This is probably a secondary use, instead of the seven Ṛkṣas, brought about by the frequent mention of the seven [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]].

ऋष्टि
<u>'''Ṛṣṭi'''</u> is a term frequently employed in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_437> Rv. i. 37, 1;<br> 64, 4. 8;<br> 166, 4;<br> v. 52, 6;<br> 54, 11;<br> 57, 6;<br> viii. 20, 11. Indra has a [[ऋष्टि|Ṛṣṭi]] in Rv. i. 169, 3 (''cf.'' Av. iv. 37. 8). ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 79.</ref> to designate a weapon held in the hands of the Maruts, and doubtless meant to indicate lightning. That it denotes a spear in mortal warfare, as Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve1_437> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 301.</ref> thinks, is not shown by a single passage.<ref name=fx3_ve1_437> Rv. i. 167. 3;<br> vii. 55. 2;<br> viii. 28, 5;<br> x. 87, 7. 24 are all mythological or contain similes.<br><br>''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Preshistoric Antiquities,'' 221.</ref>

ऋष्टि-षेण
<u>'''Ṛṣṭi-ṣeṇa'''</u> is mentioned in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_438> ii. 11. ''Cf.'' Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 130, 136.</ref> as an explanation of the patronymic '''Ārṣṭiṣeṇa,''' but nothing else is known of him.

ऋष्य-शृङ्ग
<u>'''Ṛṣya-śṛṅga'''</u> appears as a teacher, pupil of Kāśyapa, and as bearing the patronymic Kāśyapa in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] Brahmaṇa<ref name=fx1_ve1_439> iii. 40, 1 (in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]], or list of teachers).</ref> and in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_439> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 374, 385.</ref> The more correct spelling of the name is [[ऋश्य|Ṛśya]]-[[शृङ्ग|śṛṅga]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_439> The later legend connected with the name may contain old elements (see Lūders, ''Die Sage von Ṛshyaśṛṅga,'' 1897;<br> Von Schroeder, ''Mysterium und Mimus,'' 292-301), but it is not known to any Vedic text.</ref>

एक-द्यू
<u>'''Eka-dyū'''</u> is mentioned as a poet in one hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_440> viii. 80, 10. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 112.</ref>

एक-यवन् गां-दम
<u>'''Eka-yavan Gāṃ-dama'''</u> is a man mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_441> xxi. 14, 20.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_441> ii. 7, 11 (Kāṃdama). ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' i. 32;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 69.</ref> 

एक-राज्
<u>'''Eka-rāj,'''</u> ‘sole ruler,’ ‘monarch,’ seems to mean no more than ‘king.’ In the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_442> viii. 37. 3.</ref> the term is used metaphorically only. But it is found with the literal sense in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_442> viii. 15.</ref> as well as in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx3_ve1_442> iii. 4, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''[[राजसूय|Rājasūya]],'' 141</ref>

एकायन
<u>'''Ekāyana'''</u> denotes some object of study in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_443> vii. 1, 2. 4;<br> 2, 1;<br> 7, 1.</ref> The St. Petersburg Dictionary renders it ‘doctrine (''ayana'') of unity’ (''eka''), ‘monotheism,’ while Max Müller prefers ‘ethics,’ and Monier-Williams in his Dicitionary ‘worldly wisdom.’<ref name=fx2_ve1_443> Max Müller and Monier-Williams thus follow Śaṅkara's interpretation as ''nīti-śāstra,'' ‘moral teaching.’ ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 267, 484;<br> Little, ''Grammatical Index,'' 43.</ref>

एकाष्टका
<u>'''Ekāṣṭakā.'''</u>--That [[अष्टका|Aṣṭakā]] is the eighth day after the full moon appears clearly from the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_444> xv. 16, 2. ''Cf.'' Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 2, 2, 23;<br> 4, 2, 10.</ref> [[एकाष्टका|Ekāṣṭakā]], or ‘sole [[अष्टका|Aṣṭakā]],’ must denote not merely any [[अष्टका|Aṣṭakā]], but some particular one. Sāyaṇa, in his commentary on the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_444> iii. 10.</ref> in which a whole hymn celebrates the [[एकाष्टका|Ekāṣṭakā]], fixes the date meant by the term as the eighth day in the dark half of the month of Māgha (January--February). The [[एकाष्टका|Ekāṣṭakā]], is declared in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve1_444> vii. 4, 8 1. ''Cf.'' iii. 3, 8, 4;<br> iv. 3, 11, 1;<br> v. 7, 2, 2;<br> Pañcaviṃśa Brāl maṇa, v. 9, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 305;<br> Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 341, 342.</ref> to be the time for the consecration (''dīkṣā'') of those who are going to perform a year long sacrifice. See also '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''

एजत्क
<u>'''Ejatka'''</u> is the name of an insect in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_445> v. 23, 7. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindiches Leben,'' 98;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 262.</ref>

एडक
<u>'''Eḍaka'''</u> appears to denote a ‘vicious ram’ in the Śatapatha<ref name=fx1_ve1_446> xii. 4, 1, 4;<br> ''cf.'' ii. 5, 2, 15.</ref> and Jaiminīya<ref name=fx2_ve1_446> i. 51, 4 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 23, 332). ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacrea Books of the East,'' 44, 178.</ref> Brāhmaṇas. 

एणी
<u>'''Eṇī'''</u> denotes the ‘female antelope’ in the later Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve1_447> Av. v. 14, 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 15, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 17;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 36;<br> ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 82.</ref> perhaps as the feminine of '''Eta.'''

एत
<u>'''Eta'''</u> in the plural (''etāḥ'') denotes the steeds of the Maruts, being a swift species of deer, which are mentioned several times in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_448> i. 165. 2;<br> 169, 6, 7;<br> v. 54, 5;<br> x. 77. 2.</ref> and the skins of which are also said to be worn by the Maruts on their shoulders.<ref name=fx2_ve1_448> Rv. i. 166, 10. ''Cf.'' Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> The epithet ''pṛthubudhna,'' once applied to them in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx3_ve1_448> i. 169. 6.</ref> and variously interpreted as ‘broad-hoofed,’<ref name=fx4_ve1_448> By Grassman and Zimmer.</ref> ‘broad-chested,’<ref name=fx5_ve1_448> Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 235.</ref> and ‘broad in the hinder part,’<ref name=fx6_ve1_448> Monier-Williams, Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> seems to indicate that they were not gazelles.<ref name=fx7_ve1_448> ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 83.</ref>

एतश
<u>'''1. Etaśa'''</u> is in several passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_449> i. 62, 15;<br> iv. 30. 6;<br> v. 29. 5.</ref> according to Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_449> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> the name of a protégé whom Indra helped against the sun-god [[सूर्य|Sūrya]]. But in all these passages [[एतश|Etaśa]] seems merely to designate the horse of the sun.<ref name=fx3_ve1_449> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 149. 150.</ref>

एतश
<u>'''2. Etaśa'''</u> is in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_450> xxx. 5.</ref> the name of a sage who is said to have cursed his children because they interrupted him in the midst of a rite; hence the Aitaśāyanas (descendants of [[एतश|Etaśa]]) are declared to be the worst of the Bhṛgus. The same story appears in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Brāhmaṇā<ref name=fx2_ve1_450> vi. 33. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt. ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 173.</ref> where, however, the sage's name is [[ऐतश|Aitaśa]], and the Aitaśāyanas are described as the worst of the Aurvas.

एदिधिषुः-पति
<u>'''Edidhiṣuḥ-pati'''</u> is a term occurring only in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve1_451> xxx. 9.</ref> where the commentator Mahīdhara interprets it as  meaning the ‘husband of a younger sister married before the elder sister.’ Though this sense is probably correct, the form is doubtless, as Delbrück<ref name=fx2_ve1_451> ''Die indogermanischen Verwandschaftsnamen,'' 569. n. 1.</ref> points out, corrupt. See '''[[दिधिषूपति|Didhiṣūpati]].'''

एरण्ड
<u>'''Eraṇḍa,'''</u> the castor-oil plant (''Ricinus communis''), is first mentioned in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka (xii. 8).<br>==Foot Notes==

एवावद
<u>'''Evāvada'''</u> is regarded by Ludwig<ref name=fx1_ve1_453> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 138.</ref> in a very obscure passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_453> v. 44, 10.</ref> as the name of a singer beside '''[[क्षत्र|Kṣatra]], [[मनस|Manasa]],''' and '''[[यजत|Yajata]].''' The commentator Sāyaṇa also interprets the word as a proper name. Roth,<ref name=fx3_ve1_453> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> however, considers it to be an adjective meaning ‘truthful.’

ऐकादशाक्ष मानु-तन्तव्य
<u>'''Aikādaśākṣa Mānu-tantavya'''</u> appears in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_454> v. 30. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 223.</ref> as a king who observed the rule of sacrificing when the sun had risen (''udita-homin''), and as a contemporary of '''[[नगरिन् जान-श्रुतेय|Nagarin <a class="pada_vei" href="जान">Jāna]]-śruteya».'''

ऐक्ष्वाक
<u>'''Aikṣvāka,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[इक्ष्वाकु|Ikṣvāku]],’ is the patronymic borne by '''[[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]]''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_455> xiii. 5, 4, 5.</ref> Another [[ऐक्ष्वाक|Aikṣvāka]] is Vārṣṇi, a teacher mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_455> i. 5, 4.</ref> A king '''[[हरिश्चन्द्र वैधस|Hariścandra Vaidhasa]]''' [[ऐक्ष्वाक|Aikṣvāka]] is known to the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_455> vii. 13, 16.</ref> and '''Tryaruṇa''' is an [[ऐक्ष्वाक|Aikṣvāka]] in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_455> xiii. 3, 12.</ref>

ऐतरेय
<u>'''Aitareya,'''</u> perhaps a patronymic from Itara, though the commentator Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx1_ve1_456> Cited by Aufrecht, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],'' 3.</ref> regards the word as a metronymic from  Itarā, is an epithet of '''Mahidāsa''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx2_ve1_456> ii. 1, 8;<br> 3. 7.</ref> and the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_456> iii. 16, 7. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 389. The form Aitareyin occurs in the Anupada [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 1;<br> Āśvalāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 3, etc.;<br> and a [[महैतरेय|Mahaitareya]] in Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 4, etc.</ref>

ऐतश
<u>'''Aitaśa, Aitaśāyana.'''</u> See '''[[एतश|Etaśa]], Etaśāyana.''' The Aitaśapralāpa, or ‘Discourse of [[ऐतश|Aitaśa]],’ is a part of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_457> xx. 129-132. ''Cf.'' Bṛhaddevatā, viii. 101, with Macdonell's note.</ref>

ऐति-हासिक
<u>'''Aiti-hāsika.'''</u>--This term was applied to the people who explained the Vedic hymns by treating them as legendary history ('''[[इतिहास|Itihāsa]]'''), as Sieg<ref name=fx1_ve1_458> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 13 ''et seq.''</ref> shows by the passages of the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_458> ii. 16;<br> xii. 1, etc.</ref> where their views are opposed to those of the '''Nairuktas,''' who relied rather on etymology. Sieg<ref name=fx3_ve1_458> ''Op. cit.,'' 29.</ref> also seems right in finding them in the Naidānas of the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]:<ref name=fx4_ve1_458> vi. 9;<br> vii. 6.</ref> it is possible that their textbook was called the [[निदान|Nidāna]].

ऐभावत
<u>'''Aibhāvata,'''</u> ‘descendant of Ibhāvant,’ is the patronymic of '''Pratīdarśa.'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_459> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 8, 2, 3.</ref>

ऐरावत
<u>'''Airāvata,'''</u> ‘son of Irāvant,’ is the patronymic of [[धृतराष्ट्र|Dhṛtarāṣṭra]], as a snake demon,<ref name=fx1_ve1_460> In the later literature [[ऐरावत|Airāvata]] is the elephant of Indra: perhaps connected with this Vedic snake demon. as ''[[नाग|nāga]]'' means both ‘serpent’ and ‘elephant.’</ref> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_460> viii. 10, 29.</ref> and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_460> xxv. 15, 3.</ref>

ऐलूष
<u>'''Ailūṣa,'''</u> ‘descendant of Ilūṣa,’ is the patronymic of '''[[कवष|Kavaṣa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

ऐष-कृत
<u>'''Aiṣa-kṛta.'''</u> See '''Śitibāhu.''' <br>==Foot Notes==

ऐषा-वीर
<u>'''Aiṣā-vīra.'''</u>--The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] once<ref name=fx1_ve1_463> xi. 2, 7, 32.</ref> refers to the Aiṣā-vīras as officiating at a sacrifice, with the implication that they were bad sacrificers. Sāyaṇa regards the word as a proper name (‘descendants of Eṣavīra’), denoting the members of a despised family. But Roth may be right in explaining the word both in the passage mentioned above and elsewhere as meaning ‘weak’<ref name=fx2_ve1_463> In the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> or ‘insignificant man.’<ref name=fx3_ve1_463> In Bo7htlingk's Dictionary, ''s.v.'' (‘one who wishes to be a man, but is not’). ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 5, 1, 16;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, where, however, Lindner's edition reads ''saiṣā [[वीर|vīra]] iva. Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 228;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 45.</ref>

ऐषुमत
<u>'''Aiṣumata,'''</u> ‘descendant of Iṣumant,’ is the patronymic of '''Trāta''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_464> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref>

ओगण
<u>'''Ogaṇa'''</u> is a word occurring only once, as a plural, in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_465> x. 89, 15</ref> where it appears to indicate persons hostile to the seer of the hymn, and apparently opposed to the Āryan religion. Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_465> Translation of the Rigveda, 5, 209.</ref> regards the terms as the proper name of a people, but Pischel<ref name=fx3_ve1_465> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 191, 192.</ref> thinks that it is merely an adjective meaning ‘weak’ (''[[ओगण|ogaṇa]] = ava-gaṇa''), as in Pāli.

ओतु
<u>'''Otu'''</u> in Vedic literature<ref name=fx1_ve1_466> Rv. vi. 9, 2. 3;<br> Av. xiv. 2, 51;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 1, 4, etc.</ref> denotes the ‘woof’ in weaving and corresponds to '''[[तन्तु|Tantu]],''' ‘the warp,’ the roots ''vā,''<ref name=fx2_ve1_466> Rv. vi. 9, 2. etc.</ref> ‘to weave,’ and ''tan,''<ref name=fx3_ve1_466> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 80;<br> Rv. x. 130, 2;<br> Av. x. 7, 43, etc.</ref> to stretch,’ from which these two terms are derived, being used in parallel senses. In the process of weaving a shuttle ('''[[तसर|Tasara]]''') was used. The ‘weaver’ is termed ''vāya,''<ref name=fx4_ve1_466> Rv. x. 26, 6, etc.</ref> and the ‘loom’ ''veman.''<ref name=fx5_ve1_466> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 83.</ref> A wooden peg ('''[[मयूख|Mayūkha]]''') was used to  stretch the web on, while lead was employed as a weight to extend it.<ref name=fx6_ve1_466> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 80.</ref><br><br>The work of weaving was probably the special care of women.<ref name=fx7_ve1_466> Av. x. 7, 42;<br> xiv. 2, 51. ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 92. 3.</ref> A metaphor in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx8_ve1_466> x. 7, 42;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 5, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 254, 255;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 465.</ref> personifies Night and Day as two sisters weaving the web of the year, the nights serving as warp, the days as woof.

ओदन
<u>'''Odana'''</u> is a common expression<ref name=fx1_ve1_467> Rv. viii. 69, 14, etc.;<br> Av. iv. 14, 7, etc.</ref> denoting a mess, usually of grain cooked with milk (''[[क्षीर|kṣīra]]-pākam odanam'').<ref name=fx2_ve1_467> Rv. viii. 77, 10.</ref> Special varieties are mentioned, such as the ‘milk-mess’ (''[[क्षीरौदन|kṣīraudana]]''),<ref name=fx3_ve1_467> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 3, 4;<br> xi. 5, 7, 5;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 13.</ref> the ‘curd-mess’ (''dadhy-[[ओदन|odana]]''),<ref name=fx4_ve1_467> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 14.</ref> the ‘bean-mess’ (''mudgaudana''),<ref name=fx5_ve1_467> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 8.</ref> the ‘sesame-mess’ (''tilaudana''),<ref name=fx6_ve1_467> ''Ibid.;<br>'' Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 15.</ref> the ‘water-mess’ (''udaudana''),<ref name=fx7_ve1_467> ''Ibid.,'' vi. 4, 15.</ref> the ‘meat-mess’ (''[[मांसौदन|māṃsaudana]]''),<ref name=fx8_ve1_467> ''Ibid.,'' vi. 4, 16;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 7, 5;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 8.</ref> the ‘ghee-mess’ (''ghṛtaudana''),<ref name=fx9_ve1_467> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 8.</ref> etc.

ओपश
<u>'''Opaśa'''</u> is a word of somewhat doubtful sense, occurring in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_468> x. 85. 8, ''Cf.'' i. 173, 6;<br> viii. 14, 5;<br> ix. 71. 1.</ref> the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_468> vi. 138, 1. 2;<br> ix. 3, 8, where it is applied metaphorically in describing the roof of a house.</ref> and occasionally later.<ref name=fx3_ve1_468> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 1.</ref> It probably means a ‘plait’ as used in dressing the hair, especially of women,<ref name=fx4_ve1_468> Av. vi. 138. 1, 2.</ref> but apparently, in earlier times,<ref name=fx5_ve1_468> Rv. i. 173, 6;<br> viii. 14, 5.</ref> of men also. The goddess [[सिनीवाली|Sinīvālī]] is called ''svaupaśā,''<ref name=fx6_ve1_468> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 5, 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 7, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xi. 56. The reading is uncertain. Bloomfield (see below) assumes ''sv-opaśā'' to be the correct form (‘having a fair ''[[ओपश|opaśa]]''’).</ref> an epithet of doubtful sense, from which Zimmer<ref name=fx7_ve1_468> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 264.</ref> conjectures that the wearing of  false plaits of hair was not unknown in Vedic times. What was the difference between the braic referred to in the epithets ''[[पृथु|pṛthu]] ṣṭuka,''<ref name=fx8_ve1_468> Rv. x. 86, 8.</ref> ‘having broad braids,’ and ''viṣita-ṣṭuka,''<ref name=fx9_ve1_468> Rv. i. 167, 5 (of Rodasī).</ref> ‘having loosened braids,’ and the [[ओपश|Opaśa]] cannot be made out from the evidence available. Geldner<ref name=fx10_ve1_468> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 131, quoting [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 3, where ''dvy-epaśāḥ'' is used of cattle;<br> but the sense may be figurative.</ref> thinks that the original sense was ‘horn,’ and that when the word applies to Indra<ref name=fx11_ve1_468> Rv. viii. 14, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 538, 539;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 348.</ref> it means ‘diadem.’

ओषधि
<u>'''Oṣadhi.'''</u>--Roughly speaking, the vegetable world is divided in Vedic literature<ref name=fx1_ve1_469> Rv. x. 97 and ''passim. Oṣadhivanaspati'' is a frequent compound, from the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vi. 1, 1, 12) onwards. The medicinal properties of plants account for the epithet ‘of manifold powers’ (''nānā-vīryā'') applied to them in Av. xii. 1, 2.</ref> between [[ओषधि|Oṣadhi]] or '''[[वीरुध्|Vīrudh]]''' ‘plants’ and '''Vana''' or '''[[वृक्ष|Vṛkṣa]]''' ‘trees.’ [[ओषधि|Oṣadhi]] is employed in opposition to [[वीरुध्|Vīrudh]] to denote plants as possessing a healing power or some other quality useful to men, while [[वीरुध्|Vīrudh]] is rather a generic term for minor vegetable growths, but sometimes,<ref name=fx2_ve1_469> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 3, 2.</ref> when occurring beside [[ओषधि|Oṣadhi]], signifies those plants which do not possess medicinal properties.<br><br>A list of the minor parts of which a plant is made up is given in the later Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx3_ve1_469> ''Ibid.,'' vii. 3, 19, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 28.</ref> It comprises the root (''[[मूल|mūla]]''), the panicle (''tūla''), the stem (''kāṇḍa''), the twig (''[[वल्श|valśa]]''), the flower (''[[पुष्प|puṣpa]]''), and the fruit (''[[फल|phala]]''), while trees<ref name=fx4_ve1_469> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 3, 20, 1. ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 32, 5;<br> Av. x. 7, 38.</ref> have, in addition, a corona (''skandha''), branches (''[[शाखा|śākhā]]''), and leaves (''[[पर्ण|parṇa]]''). The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx5_ve1_469> viii. 7, 4, with Whitney's notes. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 579;<br> Henry, ''Les livres VIII. et IX. de l' Atharvavéda,'' 58 ''et seq.''</ref> gives an elaborate, though not very intelligible, division of plants into those which expand (''pra-stṛṇatīḥ''), are bushy (''stambinīḥ''), have only one sheath (''eka-śuṅgāḥ''), are creepers (''pra-tanvatīḥ''), have many stalks (''aṃśumatīḥ''), are  jointed (''kāṇḍinīḥ''), or have spreading branches (''vi-śākhāḥ''). In the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve1_469> x. 97. 3. 15. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben.'' 57.</ref> plants are termed ‘fruitful’ (''phalinīḥ''), ‘blossoming’ (''puṣpavatīḥ''), and ‘having flowers’ (''pra-sūvarīḥ'').

औक्ष-गन्धि
<u>'''Aukṣa-gandhi'''</u> (‘having the smell of bull's grease’) appears in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_470> iv. 37. 3.</ref> as the name of an Apsaras, beside other names, of which '''Guggulū''' and '''Naladī''' clearly indicate plants. This name, therefore, presumably also denotes some sort of fragrant plant. Aukṣa in the same Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_470> ii. 36. 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 69;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 324;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 211, 212, and on Aukṣa, ''ibid.,'' 82, 83.</ref> means ‘bull's grease’ (from ''akṣan,'' ‘bull’).

औग्र-सैन्य
<u>'''Augra-sainya,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[उग्रसेन|Ugrasena]],’ is the patronymic of King '''Yuddhāmśrauṣṭi''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 21).<br>==Foot Notes==

औदन्य
<u>'''Audanya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Udanya or [[ओदन|Odana]],’ is the patronymic in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_472> xiii. 3, 5, 4.</ref> of Muṇḍibha, who is credited with inventing an expiation for the crime of slaying a Brahmin. In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_472> iii. 9, 15, 3. ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' [[ओदन|Odana]];<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 341, n. 1.</ref> the name appears in the form of Audanyava.

औदमय
<u>'''Audamaya'''</u> is Weber's<ref name=fx1_ve1_473> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 228.</ref> reading of the name of the [[आत्रेय|Ātreya]], who was [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of '''[[अङ्ग वैरोचन|Aṅga Vairocana]],''' according to the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_473> viii. 22. ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' Udamaya.</ref> Aufrecht, however, in his edition more probably takes the correct form of the name to be '''Udamaya.''' 

औद-वाहि
<u>'''Auda-vāhi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Udavāha,’ appears in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_474> ii. 5, 20;<br> iv. 5, 26 (in the Mādhyaṃdina recension).</ref> as a teacher of [[भारद्वाज|Bhāradvāja]].

औद्-उम्बरायण
<u>'''Aud-umbarāyaṇa,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[उदुम्बर|Udumbara]],’ is the patronymic of a grammarian in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (i. 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

औद्-दालकि
<u>'''Aud-dālaki,'''</u> ‘descendant of Uddālaka,’ is the patronymic of the teacher variously called '''Asurbinda'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_476> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 75 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 23, 327).</ref> or '''Kusurubinda,'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_476> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 16;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxii. 15, 10.</ref> and of '''[[श्वेतकेतु|Śvetaketu]].'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_476> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 3, 13;<br> iv. 2, 5, 15. He is perhaps also meant in Katha [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 11.</ref>

औद्-भारि
<u>'''Aud-bhāri,'''</u> ‘descendant of Udbhāra,’ is the patronymic in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xi. 8, 4. 6) of '''Khaṇḍika,''' teacher of '''[[केशिन्|Keśin]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

औप-जन्धनि
<u>'''Aupa-jandhani,'''</u> ‘descendant of Upajandhana,’ is the patronymic of a teacher mentioned in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_478> ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 (in Vaṃśas).</ref> as a pupil of '''[[आसुरि|Āsuri]],''' and also<ref name=fx2_ve1_478> iv. 5, 27 (in the Mādhyaṃdina recension)</ref> as a pupil of '''[[सायकायन|Sāyakāyana]].'''

औप-तस्विनि
<u>'''Aupa-tasvini,'''</u> ‘descendant of Upatasvina,’ is the patronymic of '''[[राम|Rāma]]''' in the Śatapatha '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]''' (iv. 6, 1. 7).<br>==Foot Notes==

औप-मन्यव
<u>'''Aupa-manyava,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[उपमन्यु|Upamanyu]],’ is the patronymic of various persons: see '''[[काम्बोज|Kāmboja]], Prācīnaśāla, [[महाशाल|Mahāśāla]].''' The best known bearer of the name is the grammarian who disagreed with the onomatopetic theory of the derivation of names, and who is mentioned by [[यास्क|Yāska]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_480> i. 1;<br> ii. 2. 6. 11, etc.</ref> An Aupamanyavīputra occurs in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_480> xxii. 1 ''et seq''</ref> as a teacher. 

औपर
<u>'''Aupara,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[उपर|Upara]],’ is the patronymic of '''[[दण्ड|Daṇḍa]]''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (vi. 2, 9, 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

औप-वेशि
<u>'''Aupa-veśi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Upaveśa,’ is the patronymic borne by '''Aruṇa,''' father of Uddālaka.<ref name=fx1_ve1_482> See [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxvi. 10, and '''Aruṇa.'''</ref>

औपस्वती-पुत्र
<u>'''Aupasvatī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of Upasvant’(?), is mentioned as a pupil of '''[[पाराशरीपुत्र|Pārāśarīputra]]''' in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_483> vi. 5, 1 (only in the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension).</ref>

औपावि
<u>'''Aupāvi'''</u> (‘descendant of Upāva’) '''[[जान-श्रुतेय|Jāna-śruteya]]''' (‘descendant of Janaśruti’), appears in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_484> v. 1, 1, 5. 7.</ref> and the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_484> i. 4, 5. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 222, 223.</ref> as a sacrificer who used to offer the [[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]] sacrifice and ascend to the other world.

औपोदिति
<u>'''Aupoditi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Upodita,’ is the patronymic applied in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_485> i. 7, 2, 1.</ref> to '''Tumiñja,''' and in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_485> xx. 25.</ref> to '''[[गौपालायन|Gaupālāyana]],''' son of '''Vyāghrapad,''' [[स्थपति|Sthapati]] (‘general’) of the Kurus. In the form of Aupoditeya, a metronymic from Upoditā, the name is found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_485> i. 9, 3. 16.<br><br>''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East.'' 12, 271, n. 2.</ref> where the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] text calls him Tumiñja Aupoditeya [[वैयाघ्रपद्य|Vaiyāghrapadya]].

और्ण-वाभ
<u>'''Aurṇa-vābha,'''</u> ‘descendant of Ūrṇavābhi.’ (1) This is the name of a pupil of '''[[कौण्डिन्य|Kauṇḍinya]]''' mentioned in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_486> iv. 5, 26 (Mādhyaṃdina recension).</ref> (2) A teacher of this name is frequently referred to in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]. His explanations in two passages<ref name=fx2_ve1_486> vii. 15;<br> xii. 19.</ref> agree with those of the Nairuktas  or etymological school of interpreters of the Rigveda. In other passages<ref name=fx3_ve1_486> vi. 13;<br> xii. 1.</ref> he appears rather to belong to the school of the Aitihāsikas, who relied on traditional legends. He was thus probably, as Sieg<ref name=fx4_ve1_486> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 13, n. 1.</ref> suggests, an eclectic.

और्व
<u>'''Aurva,'''</u> ‘descendant of Uru or Urva,’ appears in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_487> viii. 102, 4.</ref> in close connexion with '''[[भृगु|Bhṛgu]],''' being probably a [[भृगु|Bhṛgu]] himself. As in one passage of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_487> vi. 33.</ref> the descendants of [[ऐतश|Aitaśa]] are called the worst of the Aurvas, while the parallel version of the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_487> xxx. 5.</ref> calls them the worst of the Bhṛgus, the Aurvas must have been a branch of the larger family of the Bhṛgus. [[और्व|Aurva]] himself is said in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx4_ve1_487> vii. 1, 8, 1.</ref> to have received offspring from Atri. In the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_487> xxi. 10, 6. Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 54, reads ''ūrvau.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 173, n. 1.</ref> two Aurvas are referred to as authorities. See also '''[[कुत्स|Kutsa]].'''

औलान
<u>'''Aulāna'''</u> is a word occurring in a single passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_488> x. 98, 11.</ref> where it may possibly be a patronymic of '''[[शंतनु|Śaṃtanu]]''' as a ‘descendant of Ula.’ Ludwig,<ref name=fx2_ve1_488> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 166.</ref> however, conjectures that the reading should be ‘Kaulāna.’ Sieg<ref name=fx3_ve1_488> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 141.</ref> regards [[औलान|Aulāna]] as a later descendant<ref name=fx4_ve1_488> ''Cf.'' Sāyaṇa on Rv. x, 98, 11;<br> ''Kuru kula-jātaḥ Śāṃtaṇavaḥ,'' ‘a descendant of [[शंतनु|Śaṃtanu]], born in the family of the Kurus</ref> of [[शंतनु|Śaṃtanu]], who utilized the story of Devāpi's rain-making as an introduction to his rain hymn.

औलुण्ड्य
<u>'''Auluṇḍya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Uluṇḍa,’ is the patronymic of '''Supratīta''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_489> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref> 

औशिज
<u>'''Auśija,'''</u> ‘descendant of Uśij,’ is a patronymic clearly applied to '''[[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]]''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_490> i. 18, 1.</ref> It is also applied to '''[[ऋजिश्वन्|Ṛjiśvan]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_490> x. 99, 11.</ref> but Ludwig<ref name=fx3_ve1_490> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 143, 149.</ref> thinks that the correct reading of the passage in question is ''auśijasyarjiśvā,'' ‘Ṛjiśvan, son of [[औशिज|Auśija]].’ In one verse<ref name=fx4_ve1_490> Rv. i. 112, 11.</ref> [[औशिज|Auśija]] and [[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]] are both mentioned, but in such a way that two different persons must apparently be meant. In other passages where the patronymic occurs alone, it is doubtful who is meant, or whether a proper name at all is intended.<ref name=fx5_ve1_490> Rv. i. 119, 9;<br> 122, 4;<br> iv. 21, 6, 7;<br> v. 41, 5;<br> vi. 4, 6. ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> [[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]] [[औशिज|Auśija]] appears also in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx6_ve1_490> xiv. 11, 16. See Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' xv. 56, n., and '''[[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]],''' n. 15.</ref> and elsewhere.

औष्ट्राक्षि
<u>'''Auṣṭrākṣi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Uṣṭrākṣa,’ occurs as the patronymic of '''Sāti''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_491> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 75.</ref>

कंस
<u>'''Kaṃsa,'''</u> a word denoting a ‘pot or vessel of metal,’ occurs in the Atharvaveda and elsewhere.<ref name=fx1_ve1_492> Av. x. 10, 5;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 10;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 3, 1, etc.;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vii. 23;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 8.</ref>

ककर
<u>'''Kakara'''</u> occurs in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_493> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xx. 24.</ref> as the name of a victim at the horse sacrifice ([[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]]). It probably denotes some ‘sort of bird,’ as rendered by the commentator Mahīdhara.<ref name=fx2_ve1_493> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit. Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 94.</ref>

ककुठ
<u>'''Kakuṭha,'''</u> a word occurring in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve1_494> iii. 14, 13.</ref> presumably denotes some kind of animal. According to Bo7htlingk,<ref name=fx2_ve1_494> Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> it is identical with '''[[कक्कट|Kakkaṭa]].''' 

ककुह
<u>'''Kakuha,'''</u> a word occurring several times in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_495> i. 46, 3;<br> 181 5;<br> 184, 3;<br> ii. 34, 11;<br> iii. 54, 14;<br> v. 73, 7;<br> 75, 4;<br> viii. 6, 48.</ref> is understood by Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_495> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> to designate part of a chariot, perhaps the seat. Ludwig,<ref name=fx3_ve1_495> Translation of the Rigveda, 2, 182;<br> 3, 160, 161;<br> 5, 142.</ref> again, regards it in one passage<ref name=fx4_ve1_495> viii. 6, 48.</ref> as the proper name of a Yādava prince who took spoil from '''[[तिरिन्दिर|Tirindira]],''' the '''[[पर्शु|Parśu]],''' but this view is hardly probable.<ref name=fx5_ve1_495> Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 36, 37.</ref> It is, on the whole, most likely that the word always means ‘chief,’ ‘pre-eminent,’ being applied as an epithet to horses, chariots, princes, etc.<ref name=fx6_ve1_495> So certainly in Rv. viii. 45, 14;<br> ix. 67, 8;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 3, 3, 1. 2, and often in the older form ''kakubha.''</ref> This is the only sense given by Grassmann,<ref name=fx7_ve1_495> In his Lexicon, ''s.v.''</ref> and later adopted by Roth.<ref name=fx8_ve1_495> In Bo7htlingk's Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref>

कक्कट
<u>'''Kakkaṭa'''</u> denotes the ‘crab’ in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve1_496> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 15, 1 (where Weber has ''katkaṭa'');<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 32.</ref> being a Prākritized form of Karkaṭa, which is common in the later literature.<ref name=fx2_ve1_496> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 95.</ref> Roth,<ref name=fx3_ve1_496> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> however, takes the word to mean a bird, and compares '''[[ककर|Kakara]].''' See also '''[[ककुठ|Kakuṭha]].'''

कक्ष
<u>'''Kakṣa'''</u> is the name of two men mentioned as teachers in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. One is [[कक्ष|Kakṣa]] [[वारक्य|Vārakya]], pupil of '''[[प्रोष्ठपद|Proṣṭhapada]] [[वारक्य|Vārakya]],'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_497> iii. 41, 1.</ref> and the other [[कक्ष|Kakṣa]] Vārāki<ref name=fx2_ve1_497> iii. 41, 1.</ref> or Vārakyā,<ref name=fx3_ve1_497> iv. 17, 1.</ref> pupil of '''[[दक्ष कात्यायनि आत्रेय|Dakṣa <a class="pada_vei" href="कात्यायनि">Kātyāyani]] Ātreya».''' See also '''[[उरुकक्ष|Urukakṣa]].'''

कक्षीवन्त्
<u>'''Kakṣīvant'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] mentioned frequently in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_498> i. 18, 1;<br> 51, 13;<br> 112, 11;<br> 116, 7;<br> 117, 6;<br> 126, 3;<br> iv. 26, 1;<br> viii. 9, 10;<br> ix. 74, 8;<br> x. 25, 10;<br> 61, 16.</ref> and occasionally elsewhere.<ref name=fx2_ve1_498> Av. iv. 29, 5, and passage noted below.</ref> He appears to have been a descendant of a female slave named Uśij.<ref name=fx3_ve1_498> Rv. i. 18, 1;<br> perhaps also i, 112, 11, but [[औशिज|Auśija]] may there be a separate name (see [[औशिज|Auśija]]). ''Cf.'' [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 11, 16.</ref> He must have been a '''[[पज्र|Pajra]]''' by family, as he bears the epithet [[पज्रिय|Pajriya]],<ref name=fx4_ve1_498> Rv. i. 116, 7;<br> 117, 6.</ref>  and his descendants are called Pajras.<ref name=fx5_ve1_498> Rv. i. 126, 4.</ref> In a hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve1_498> i. 126.</ref> he celebrates the prince '''[[स्वनय भाव्य|Svanaya Bhāvya]],''' who dwelt on the '''[[सिन्धु|Sindhu]]''' (Indus), as having bestowed magnificent gifts on him; and the list of Nārāśaṃsas (‘Praises of Heroes’) in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx7_ve1_498> xvi. 4, 5.</ref> mentions one by [[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]] [[औशिज|Auśija]] in honour of Svanaya [[भावयव्य|Bhāvayavya]]. In his old age he obtained as a wife the maiden '''[[वृचया|Vṛcayā]].'''<ref name=fx8_ve1_498> Rv. i. 51, 13.</ref> He appears to have lived to be a hundred,<ref name=fx9_ve1_498> Rv. ix. 74, 8.</ref> the typical length of life in the Vedas. He seems always to be thought of as belonging to the past, and in a hymn of the fourth book of the Rigveda<ref name=fx10_ve1_498> iv. 26, 1.</ref> he is mentioned with the semi-mythical '''[[कुत्स|Kutsa]]''' and '''Kavi Uśanas.''' Later, also, he is a teacher of bygone days.<ref name=fx11_ve1_498> Av. iv. 29, 5;<br> xviii. 3, 15;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 21, 6. 7;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 11.</ref><br><br>In Vedic literature he is not connected with '''[[दीर्घतमस्|Dīrghatamas]]''' beyond being once mentioned along with him in a hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx12_ve1_498> viii. 9, 10</ref> But in the Bṛhaddevatā<ref name=fx13_ve1_498> iv. 11 ''et seq.''</ref> he appears as a son of [[दीर्घतमस्|Dīrghatamas]] by a slave woman, Uśij.<br><br>Weber<ref name=fx14_ve1_498> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 22-25.</ref> considers that [[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]] was originally a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]], not a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], quoting in favour of this view the fact that he is mentioned beside kings like '''[[पर आट्णार|Para Āṭṇāra]], [[वीतहव्य|Vītahavya]] [[श्रायस|Śrāyasa]],''' and '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]] Paurukutsya.'''<ref name=fx15_ve1_498> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 6, 5, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxii. 3;<br> Pancaviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 16, 3, ''Cf.'' xiv. 11, 16.<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 221, 236, n. 1;<br> Ludwig Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 102;<br> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Kommentar,'' 23, 24.</ref> But that these are all kings is an unnecessary assumption: these persons are mentioned in the passages in question undoubtedly only as famous men of old, to whom are ascribed mythical sacrificial performances, and who thus gained numerous sons.

कङ्क
<u>'''Kaṅka'''</u> is the name of a bird, usually taken to mean ‘heron,’<ref name=fx1_ve1_499> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 92.</ref> but, at any rate in some passages, rather denoting some bird of prey.<ref name=fx2_ve1_499> Roth. St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Cf.'' Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, xii. 13.</ref> It first appears in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx3_ve1_499> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 4, 11, 1 (''[[कङ्क|kaṅka]]-cit,'' an altar ‘piled in the form of a heron’);<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 31;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 12;<br> [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]], ii. 9, 3, 6, 1</ref> 

कङ्कत
<u>'''Kaṅkata'''</u> is the name of an animal mentioned once in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_500> i. 191, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98.</ref> According to Sāyaṇa it is a destructive beast; perhaps, as Grassmann renders it, a ‘scorpion.’

कङ्कतीय
<u>'''Kaṅkatīya'''</u> is the name of a family said in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_501> ix. 4, 4, 17.</ref> to have learned from '''[[शाण्डिल्य|Śāṇḍilya]]''' the piling up of the sacrificial firse (''agni-cayana.'') In the Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_501> xiv. 20, 4.</ref> a Kaṅkati [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], no doubt the textbook of the school, is referred to. It may have been identical with the Chāgaleya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], cited in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_501> xxv. 5. ''Cf.'' Caland, ''Über das vituclle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 40.</ref>

कङ्क-पर्वन्
<u>'''Kaṅka-parvan'''</u> (‘heron-jointed’?), a term occurring once in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_502> vii. 56, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 94;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 426;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 553;<br> Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> is applied to a snake, meaning perhaps ‘scorpion.’ As the Paippalāda recension has a different reading (''[[अङ्ग|aṅga]]-parvaṇaḥ''), the passage may be corrupt.

कट
<u>'''Kaṭa'''</u> denotes a ‘mat,’ which was ‘made of reeds’ (''vaitasa''). The maker of mats from reeds (''[[बिदल-कारी|bidala-kārī]]'') is mentioned in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve1_503> xxx. 8, with Mahīdhara's Commentary. ''Bidala-kāra'' is read in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 5, 1.</ref> and the process of splitting reeds for the purpose is referred to in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx3_ve1_503> vi. 138, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 255.</ref><br><br>^1) [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā. v. 3, 12, 2. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 1, 3.

कण्टकी-कारी
<u>'''Kaṇṭakī-kārī,'''</u> ‘worker in thorns,’ is one of the victims at the human sacrifice (Puruṣamedha) in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve1_504> xxx. 8. The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 5, 1, has ''kaṇṭaka-kāra. Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 255.</ref> No doubt the thorns were cut up and used to plait mats ('''[[कट|Kaṭa]]''') or to stuff cushions. 

कण्व
<u>'''Kaṇva'''</u> is the name of an ancient [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] repeatedly referred to in the Rigveda and later.<ref name=fx1_ve1_505> Rv. i. 36, 8. 10. 11. 17. 19;<br> 39, 7. 9;<br> 47, 5;<br> 112, 5;<br> 117, 18;<br> 118, 7;<br> 139, 9;<br> v. 41, 4;<br> viii. 5, 23. 25;<br> 7, 18;<br> 8, 20;<br> 49, 10;<br> 50, 10;<br> x. 71, 11;<br> 115, 5;<br> 150, 5;<br> Av. iv. 37, 1;<br> vii. 15, 1;<br> xviii. 3, 15;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvii. 74;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 2, 2;<br> ix. 2, 6;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxviii. 8, Kaṇvavat occurs in Rv. viii. 6, 11;<br> 52, 8;<br> Av. ii. 32, 3;<br> [[कण्व|Kaṇva]]-mant in Rv. viii. 2, 22.</ref> His sons and descendants,<ref name=fx2_ve1_505> As ''Kaṇvāḥ'' (in the plural), Rv. i. 14, 2. 5;<br> 37, 1. 14;<br> 44, 8;<br> 46, 9;<br> 47. 2. 4-10;<br> 49, 4;<br> viii. 2, 16;<br> 3, 16;<br> 4, 2. 3;<br> 5, 4;<br> 6, 3. 18. 21. 31. 34. 47;<br> 7, 32;<br> 8, 3;<br> 9, 14;<br> 32, 1;<br> 33, 3;<br> 34, 4;<br> as ''Kaṇvasya sūnavaḥ,'' Rv. i, 45, 5;<br> as ''putrāḥ,'' viii. 8, 4. 8;<br> as ''Kāṇvāyanāḥ,'' viii. 55, 4. ''[[काण्व|Kāṇva]]'' is found in viii. 1, 8;<br> 2, 40;<br> 4, 20;<br> 7, 19;<br> 9, 3, 9;<br> 10, 2.</ref> the Kaṇvas, are also often mentioned, especially in the eighth book of the Rigveda, the authorship of that book, as well as of part of the first, being attributed to this family. A descendant of [[कण्व|Kaṇva]] is also denoted by the name in the singular, either alone<ref name=fx3_ve1_505> ''Eg.,'' Rv. i. 48, 4;<br> viii. 34, 1, and probably elsewhere.</ref> or accompanied by a patronymic, as [[कण्व|Kaṇva]] [[नार्षद|Nārṣada]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_505> Rv. i. 117, 8;<br> Av. iv. 19, 2;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 150.</ref> and [[कण्व|Kaṇva]] [[श्रायस|Śrāyasa]],<ref name=fx5_ve1_505> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 4, 7, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxi. 8;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 3, 9.</ref> besides in the plural the Kaṇvas Sauśravasas.<ref name=fx6_ve1_505> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiii. 12. There is also [[वत्स|Vatsa]] [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] in [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 11, 20.</ref> The [[कण्व|Kaṇva]] family appears to have been connected with the Atri family,<ref name=fx7_ve1_505> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 214.</ref> but not to have been of great importance.<ref name=fx8_ve1_505> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 285. ''Cf.'' 1, 207, 438.</ref> In one passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx9_ve1_505> Av. ii. 25. ''Cf.'' Vārttika on Pāṇini, iii. 1, 14;<br> Bergaigne, ''Religion Védique,'' 2, 465;<br> Hillebrandt, ''op. cit.,'' 1, 207;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 110.<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''op. cit.,'' 216 ''et seq.;<br>'' Ludwig, ''op. cit.,'' 3, 105.</ref> they seem to be definitely regarded with hostility.

कथा
<u>'''Kathā.'''</u>--The later use of this word<ref name=fx1_ve1_506> Colebrooke, ''Miscellaneous Essays,'' 1, 293.</ref> in the sense of a ‘philosophical discussion’ appears in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_506> i. 8, 1: ''hantodgīthe kathāṃ vadāma,'' ‘let us begin a discussion regarding the Udgītha.’</ref>

कद्रू
<u>'''Kadrū,'''</u> a word occurring only once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_507> viii. 45, 26.</ref> is interpreted by Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_507> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 162.</ref> as the name of a priest, but it more probably means a Soma vessel.<ref name=fx3_ve1_507> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> 

कनक्नक
<u>'''Kanaknaka,'''</u> a word occurring once in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_508> x. 4, 22. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 604;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 578.</ref> either denotes a poison or is an adjective qualifying ''[[काण्डा-विष|kāṇḍā-viṣa]],'' a species of poison.

कना
<u>'''Kanā, Kanyā.'''</u>--Both these words, of which the former is very rare,<ref name=fx1_ve1_509> Rv. x. 61, 5, etc.</ref> while the latter is the normal term from the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_509> i. 123, 10;<br> 161, 5;<br> iii. 23, 10, etc.;<br> Av. i. 14, 2;<br> xi. 5, 18;<br> xii, 1, 25, etc.</ref> onwards, denote ‘maiden’ or ‘young woman.’ It is doubtful whether Kanīnakā (accented on the final syllable) has this meaning,<ref name=fx3_ve1_509> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' cites in this sense Rv. iv. 32, 23;<br> x. 40, 9;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iv. 15;<br> but neither of the Rv. passages is at all clear.</ref> or only denotes the pupil of the eye,<ref name=fx4_ve1_509> See Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 401;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyāka,'' 207. Other rare forms are ''kanyanā,'' Rv. viii. 35, 5;<br> ''kauyalā,'' Av. v. 5, 3;<br> xiv. 2, 52.</ref> which is the sense of ''kanīnakā'' or ''kanīnikā'' (both accented on the antepenultimate) in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas. See also '''[[स्त्री|Strī]].'''

कपना
<u>'''Kapanā,'''</u> from its solitary occurrence in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_510> v. 54, 6.</ref> appears to mean a ‘worm’ that destroys the leaves of trees, and is so interpreted in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_510> vi. 4. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 97;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 330.</ref>

कपर्द
<u>'''Kaparda,'''</u> ‘braid,’ '''Kapardin,''' ‘wearing braids.’ These words refer to the Vedic custom of wearing the hair in braids or plaits. Thus a maiden is said to have her hair in four plaits (''catuṣ-kapardā''),<ref name=fx1_ve1_511> Rv. x. 114, 3.</ref> and the goddess [[सिनीवाली|Sinīvālī]] is described as ‘wearing fair braids’ (''su-kapardā'').<ref name=fx2_ve1_511> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xi. 56.</ref> Men also wore their hair in this style, for both Rudra<ref name=fx3_ve1_511> Rv. i. 114, 1. 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 10. 29. 43. 48. 59.</ref> and Pūṣan<ref name=fx4_ve1_511> Rv. vi. 55, 2;<br> ix. 67. 11.</ref> are said to have done so, while the '''Vasiṣṭhas'''<ref name=fx5_ve1_511> Rv. vii. 33, 1. ''Cf.'' 83, 8.</ref> were distinguished by wearing their hair in a plait on the right (''[[दक्षिणतस्-कपर्द|dakṣiṇatas-kaparda]]''). The opposite was to wear one's hair ‘plain’ (''[[पुलस्ति|pulasti]]'').<ref name=fx6_ve1_511> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 43. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 264, 265;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' v. 462;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 424.</ref> See also '''[[ओपश|Opaśa]].''' 

कपि
<u>'''1. Kapi,'''</u> ‘monkey,’ occurs only once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_512> x. 86. 5. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 174;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 22 ''et seq.;<br>'' von Schroeder, ''Mysterium und Mimus,'' 304 ''et seq.;<br>'' Schirmeisen, ''Die Arischen Go7ttergestalten,'' 218 ''et seq.;<br>'' Tilak, ''Orion,'' 170-197.</ref> with reference to Vṛṣā-kapi, the ‘Man-ape,’ in the dialogue of Indra and Indrāṇī in the presence of Vṛṣākapi. There the ape is termed the ‘tawny’ (''[[हरित|harita]]''). In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_512> iii. 9, 4;<br> iv. 32, 11;<br> vi. 49, 1. ''Cf.'' also Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 6, 7 (''kapy-āsa,'' ‘seat of an ape’).</ref> the monkey is mentioned several times as hairy, and an enemy of dogs. That the ape was tamed appears from its position in the Vṛṣākapi hymn, and from the mention, in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx3_ve1_512> iv. 2, 10, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 85, 86.</ref> of a '''Mayu''' as belonging to the forest. See also '''Mayu, [[मर्कट|Markaṭa]],''' and '''[[पुरुष हस्तिन्|Puruṣa Hastin]].'''

कपि
<u>'''2. Kapi'''</u> is, according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, another name for [[लुश|Luśa]] [[खार्गलि|Khārgali]] in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā (xxx. 2), but the name appears rather to be '''Luśākapi.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कपिञ्जल
<u>'''Kapiñjala,'''</u> the name of the ‘francoline partridge’ or ‘hazelcock,’ is found in all the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve1_514> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 1, 1;<br> v. 5, 16, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 10;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 20. 38.</ref> and occasionally later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_514> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 3;<br> v. 5, 4, 4;<br> xiii. 5, 1, 13;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 154, 2 (''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 181).<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 91.</ref>

कपिल
<u>'''Kapila'''</u> appears in the Śvetāśvatara [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_515> v. 2.</ref> as a teacher, according to Weber<ref name=fx2_ve1_515> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 24 ''et seq.;<br>'' 5, 412;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 236.</ref> and Garbe,<ref name=fx3_ve1_515> ''Sāṅkhya Philosophie,'' 27 ''et seq.;<br>'' Translation of the Śāṅkhyatattvakaumudī, 531.</ref> who think that the expression ''[[कपिल|kapila]] ṛṣiḥ'' there refers to the founder of the Sāṅkhya philosophy. But this is doubtful.<ref name=fx4_ve1_515> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 2, xli, and Deussen, in his translation (''Sechzig Upanishads,'' 304), do not take the word as a teacher's name. The latter renders ''[[कपिल|kapila]] ṛṣiḥ,'' by ‘the red sage,’ as referring to Hiraṇyagarbha.</ref> 

कपि-वन भौवायन
<u>'''Kapi-vana Bhauvāyana'''</u> is mentioned as a teacher in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_516> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 4, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxii. 2.</ref> and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_516> xx. 13, 4.</ref> A rite called Kapivana's Dvyaha (‘ceremony lasting two days’) is also referred to in the Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_516> xxv. 2, 3. ''Cf.'' Āśvalāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 24, 3, 473;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 55, n. 2;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 157.</ref>

कपोत
<u>'''Kapota'''</u> is the name of a bird, probably the ‘pigeon’ (its sense in the later language), occurring from the Rigveda onwards.<ref name=fx1_ve1_517> Rv. i. 30, 4;<br> Av. xx. 135, 12;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 23. 38.</ref> It is associated in some passages<ref name=fx2_ve1_517> Rv. x. 165, 1-5;<br> Av. vi. 29, 2.</ref> with the owl ('''[[उलूक|Ulūka]]''') as a messenger of Nirṛti (‘dissolution,’ ‘misfortune’). This aspect of the pigeon as a bird of evil omen is probably based on an ancient belief which is also found beyond the confines of India.<ref name=fx3_ve1_517> ''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prchistoric Antiquities,'' 253.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 89;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref>

कबन्ध आथर्वण
<u>'''Kabandha Ātharvaṇa'''</u> is mentioned in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_518> vi. 7, 1. ''Cf.'' also Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 9. 18;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 176, n. 4;<br> Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 149.</ref> along with '''[[सुधन्वन् आङ्गिरस|Sudhanvan Āṅgirasa]],''' as a teacher, but is semi-mythical. His son was '''[[विचारिन् काबन्धि|Vicārin Kābandhi]].'''

कम-द्यू
<u>'''Kama-dyū'''</u> appears once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_519> x. 65, 12.</ref> as the wife of '''[[विमद|Vimada]].''' She is probably identical with the ‘maiden’ (''yoṣā'') of '''[[पुरुमित्र|Purumitra]],''' no doubt his daughter. She is elsewhere<ref name=fx2_ve1_519> i. 117, 20;<br> x. 39, 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 310.</ref> referred to in connexion with [[विमद|Vimada]], who appears to have taken her for his bride against the will of her father.

कम्बल
<u>'''Kambala'''</u> denotes in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_520> xiv. 2, 66. 67. ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 2.</ref> a ‘woollen coverlet’ or ‘blanket.’ 

कम्बोज
<u>'''Kamboja.--Yāska,'''</u> in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_521> ii. 2.</ref> refers to the speech of the Kambojas as differing from that of the other Āryas. The Kambojas were later settled to the north-west of the Indus, and are known as Kambujiya in the old Persian inscriptions. A teacher, '''[[काम्बोज|Kāmboja]] [[औपमन्यव|Aupamanyava]],''' pupil of '''Madragāra,''' is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_521> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 102;<br> Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 2, 493;<br> 3, 384;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 7;<br> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 45;<br> Max Müller, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 7, 373. On the relation of Indian and Iranian, see also Jacobi, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 721 ''et seq.;<br>'' 1910, 457 ''et seq.;<br>'' Oldenberg, ''ibid.,'' 1095 ''et seq.;<br>'' Keith, ''ibid.,'' 1100 ''et seq.;<br>'' Kennedy, ''ibid.,'' 1107 ''et seq.;<br>'' and see '''[[पर्शु|Parśu]].'''</ref> This points to a possible connexion of the Madras, or more probably the '''Uttara Madras,''' with the Kambojas, who probably had Iranian as well as Indian affinities.

करञ्ज
<u>'''Karañja,'''</u> a word which in the Sūtras and later denotes the tree ''Pongamia glabra,'' occurs only twice in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_522> i. 53, 8;<br> x. 48, 8.</ref> as the name of a foe of Indra, but whether a demon or a man<ref name=fx2_ve1_522> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 63;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 149;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 292.</ref> is intended remains uncertain.

करम्भ
<u>'''Karambha'''</u> is the name, from the Rigveda onwards,<ref name=fx1_ve1_523> Rv. i. 187, 16;<br> iii. 52, 7;<br> vi. 56, 1;<br> 57, 2;<br> viii. 102, 2;<br> Av. iv. 7, 2. 3;<br> vi. 16, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 10, 2;<br> vi. 5, 11, 4, etc.</ref> of a kind of porridge made of grain ('''Yava'''), which was unhusked, parched slightly, and kneaded.<ref name=fx2_ve1_523> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 2, 14;<br> iv. 2, 4, 18. ''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 317;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 395, n. 1.</ref> It was the especial sacrificial portion of Pūṣan, no doubt in his capacity of an agricultural deity. Karmabha was also made of barley ('''[[उपवाक|Upavāka]]''')<ref name=fx3_ve1_523> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 22.</ref> or of sesame ('''[[तिर्य|Tirya]]''').<ref name=fx4_ve1_523> Av. iv. 7, 3, but see Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 377;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 155.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 270.</ref> 

करिक्रत
<u>'''Karikrata'''</u> denotes, according to Zimmer,<ref name=fx1_ve1_524> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 95</ref> a snake in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_524> x. 4, 13. The Paippalāda version has Kanikrada.</ref>

करीर
<u>'''Karīra,'''</u> the name of a leafless shrub, ''Capparis aphylla,'' or its fruit, first appears in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_525> ii. 4, 9, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 11;<br> xxxvi. 7;<br> Śatapatha Brahmaṇa, ii. 5, 2, 11.</ref>

करीष
<u>'''Karīṣa'''</u> denotes ‘dry cow dung’ in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_526> ii. 1, 1, 7.</ref> The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_526> Av. iii. 14, 3. 4;<br> xix. 31, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 236.</ref> shows that the value of the natural manure of animals in the fields was appreciated.

कर्कन्धु
<u>'''1. Karkandhu'''</u> is the ordinary word for ‘jujube,’ the tree (''Zizyphus jujuba'') and the fruit, from the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās onwards.<ref name=fx1_ve1_527> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 10;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 23. 91;<br> xxi. 32;<br> xxiv. 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 4, 10;<br> xii. 7, 2, 9;<br> 9, 1, 5, etc.;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 156. 5.</ref> The berry is red (''[[रोहित|rohita]]'').<ref name=fx2_ve1_527> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 242.</ref> Compare '''[[कुवल|Kuvala]]''' and '''[[बदर|Badara]],''' which denote the fruit.

कर्कन्धु
<u>'''2. Karkandhu'''</u> is only the name borne by a protégé of the Aśvins in the Rigveda (i. 112, 6). Its identity with the word for jujube indicates that the latter, though not otherwise mentioned there, was known at the time of the Rigveda.<br>==Foot Notes==

कर्करि
<u>'''Karkari,'''</u> a musical instrument, probably the ‘lute,’ occurs from the Rigveda onwards.<ref name=fx1_ve1_529> Rv. ii. 43, 3;<br> Av. iv. 37. 4. ''Cf.'' xx. 132. 3. 8.</ref> The Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_529> iv. 2, 9. ''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Gurupūjākaumudī,'' 48, 49.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 289.</ref> mentions cattle branded on the ears with a mark resembling a lute (''[[कर्करि|karkari]]-karṇyaḥ''). 

कर्की
<u>'''Karkī'''</u> may denote in one passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_530> iv. 38, 6. 7. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 414.</ref> a white cow,’ according to the suggestion of Roth.<ref name=fx2_ve1_530> St. Petersburg Dictionary and Bo7htlingk's Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref>

कर्ण-शोभन
<u>'''Karṇa-śobhana'''</u> denotes an ‘ornament for the ear’ in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_531> viii. 78, 3.</ref> apparently for the use of men. Some deity is called ‘gold-eared’ in another passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_531> i. 122, 14. See also i. 64, 10.</ref> Hopkins<ref name=fx3_ve1_531> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 35.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 262.</ref> considers the use of ear-rings later than that of necklets and wristlets.

कर्ण-श्रवस् आङ्गिरस
<u>'''Karṇa-śravas Āṅgirasa'''</u> is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 11, 14) as a seer of Sāmans or chants, the same tale being told of him as of '''Dāvasu.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कर्मार
<u>'''Karmāra,'''</u> the ‘smith,’ is several times mentioned with approval in the Vedic Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve1_533> Rv. x. 72, 2;<br> Av. iii. 5, 6;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 13;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 27;<br> xxx. 7. ''Cf. [[कर्मार|karmāra]],'' Rv. ix. 112, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 3, 1.</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_533> iii. 5, 6. The exact sense of the passage is doubtful. Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 252;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 144;<br> and Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 92, take the reference to be to ‘skilled chariot-makers’ (''dhīvāno [[रथ|ratha]]-kārāḥ'') and ‘clever smiths,’ but this is perhaps less likely. The commentator interprets ''dhīvānaḥ'' as ‘fishermen’ (in the later language ''dhīvara'' means both a ‘clever man’ and a ‘fisherman’).</ref> smiths appear with fishermen (''dhīvānaḥ'') and chariot-builders (''rathakārāḥ''), all being classified as clever workers (''manīṣiṇaḥ''): possibly a quasi-caste of smiths was already developing from the guild organization that probably existed.<ref name=fx3_ve1_533> ''Cf.'' Fick, ''Die sociale Gliederung,'' 182.</ref><br><br>Little is known of the smith's methods of work and of his tools. No doubt he smelted (''dhmā'') the ore in the fire; hence he is called ''[[ध्मातृ|dhmātṛ]],'' the ‘smelter.’<ref name=fx4_ve1_533> Rv. v. 9. 5.</ref> Mention is also made of  his bellows of birds' feathers.<ref name=fx5_ve1_533> Rv. ix. 112, 2.</ref> He made metal vessels (''[[घर्म|gharma]] ayasmaya'')<ref name=fx6_ve1_533> Rv. v. 30, 15.</ref> to be put on the fire: even the Soma cup could occasionally be made of hammered metal (''ayo-hata'').<ref name=fx7_ve1_533> Rv. ix. 1, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 252, 253;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 196 ''et seq.;<br> Über den [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]],'' 19 ''et seq.''</ref>

कर्वर
<u>'''Karvara,'''</u> a word found in one passage of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_534> x. 4, 19.</ref> seems to mean some kind of fish<ref name=fx2_ve1_534> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 96;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 578.</ref> caught by a fisherman (''[[पौञ्जिष्ठ|pauñjiṣṭha]]'').

कर्षू
<u>'''Karṣū,'''</u> a rare word found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_535> i. 8, 1, 3;<br> xiii. 8, 3, 10. ''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 283.</ref> denotes a ‘furrow’ or ‘trench.’

कलविङ्क
<u>'''Kalaviṅka,'''</u> a name of the ‘sparrow,’ is found in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve1_536> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 1, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 10;<br> Vājasaneyi Samhitā, xxiv. 20. 31.</ref> and occasionally later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_536> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 4;<br> v. 5, 4, 5;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 154, 3 (''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 181). ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 91.</ref>

कलश
<u>'''Kalaśa'''</u> is, from the Rigveda onwards,<ref name=fx1_ve1_537> Rv. i. 117, 12;<br> iii. 32, 15;<br> iv. 27, 5;<br> 32, 19, etc.;<br> Av. iii. 12, 7;<br> ix. 1, 6;<br> 4, 15;<br> xviii. 4, 13, etc. In Rv. x. 32, 9, the word, according to the Śt. Petersburg Dictionary, is used as a proper name, but the passage is very doubtful.</ref> a common word for ‘pot’ or ‘jar,’ probably either formed of a gourd or made of clay (unburnt or baked), as we know that both kinds of pot were in use.<ref name=fx2_ve1_537> Av. iv. 17, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 1, 8, 1;<br> iv. 1, 5, 4;<br> v. 1, 7, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, i. 22;<br> xi. 59. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 253;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 257;<br> Oertel, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 185, n. 3;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 183 ''et seq.''</ref> The wooden Soma tub (''[[द्रोण|droṇa]]-[[कलश|kalaśa]]'') is frequently referred to in the ritual. See also '''[[कोश|Kośa]].''' 

कला
<u>'''Kalā'''</u> denotes a fractional part, normally ‘one-sixteenth,’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_538> viii. 47, 17.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_538> Av. vi. 96, 3;<br> xix. 57, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 10, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 7, 7;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 3, 1;<br> xii. 8, 3, 13, etc.;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], xi. 12. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 278;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 259.</ref> It is often mentioned in connexion with '''[[शफ|Śapha]],''' ‘one-eighth.’

कलि
<u>'''1. Kali.'''</u> See '''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कलि
<u>'''2. Kali'''</u> occurs in the Rigveda, twice in the singular<ref name=fx1_ve1_540> i. 112, 15;<br> x. 39, 8.</ref> as the name of a protégé of the Aśvins, and once in the plural.<ref name=fx2_ve1_540> viii. 66, 15.</ref> The persons meant in the latter passage seem to be different from the former one. The Kalis are once mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_540> x. 10, 13.</ref> beside the Gandharvas.<ref name=fx4_ve1_540> These Kalis may be connected with dicing, as in the Atharvaveda the Apsarases, the wives of the Gandharvas, are fond of dice, and bestow luck at play. See Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 135.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 89;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 163.</ref>

कल्प
<u>'''Kalpa'''</u> in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka (ii. 10) seems to denote [[कल्प|Kalpa]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<br>==Foot Notes==

कल्माष-ग्रीव
<u>'''Kalmāṣa-grīva'''</u> (‘speckled-neck’) is the name of a snake in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_542> iii. 27, 5 (where the Paippalāda recension has ''[[कुल्माष|kulmāṣa]]-'');<br> xii. 3, 59. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 10, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 94, 95.</ref>

कल्याण
<u>'''Kalyāṇa'''</u> is the name, in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_543> xii. 11, 10. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 68, n. 2.</ref> of an [[आङ्गिरस|Āṅgirasa]] who saw the Aurṇāyava Sāman. 

कवच
<u>'''Kavaca'''</u> denotes a ‘corselet’ or ‘breastplate’ in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_544> Av. xi. 10, 22 (''kavacin'').</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_544> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 2, 2, 7;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 19, 2;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 25 (''[[कवच|kavaca]]'');<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 1, 6, 3;<br> 4, 1, 5;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 48;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 45 (''kavacin'').</ref> There is nothing to show whether it was made of metal, but that it was so is quite possible (see '''[[वर्मन्|Varman]]'''). The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_544> xi. 10, 22.</ref> refers to a ‘corselet-strap’ (''[[कवच|kavaca]]-[[पाश|pāśa]]''), which may point to a linen corselet such as those known to Herodotus.<ref name=fx4_ve1_544> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 129, and Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 659, seem to recognize coats of mail only.</ref>

कवष
<u>'''Kavaṣa'''</u> is mentioned in a hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_545> vii. 18, 12.</ref> as one of those whom, together with the '''[[द्रुह्यु|Druhyu]]''' king, Indra overthrew for the '''Tṛtsus.''' The Anukramaṇī (Index) also attributes to him the authorship of several hymns of the Rigveda, including two (x. 32. 33) that deal with a prince '''Kuruśravaṇa''' and his descendant '''[[उपमश्रवस्|Upamaśravas]].''' There seems no reason to doubt this attribution, which is accepted by both Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve1_545> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 127.</ref> and Geldner.<ref name=fx3_ve1_545> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 150.</ref> The former holds that [[कवष|Kavaṣa]] was the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of the joint tribes named '''[[वैकर्ण|Vaikarṇa]],''' in whom he sees the KuruKrivi ([[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]]) peoples, and that [[कवष|Kavaṣa]] in that capacity is mentioned in the Rigveda as representative of those peoples. He also suggests that the language of Rigveda x. 33, 4 is best explained by the reduced position in which the Kuru-Krivis found themselves on their defeat by the Tṛtsus. Ludwig,<ref name=fx4_ve1_545> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 139.</ref> on the other hand, thinks that [[कवष|Kavaṣa]] was the priest of the five peoples. Geldner<ref name=fx5_ve1_545> ''Loc. cit.''</ref> holds that [[कवष|Kavaṣa]] was the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of Kuruśravaṇa, by whose son, [[उपमश्रवस्|Upamaśravas]], he was ill-treated, and that he composed Rigveda x. 33 to deprecate the anger of his royal master. Hopkins<ref name=fx6_ve1_545> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 261, 263.</ref> thinks that he was a king.<br><br>In the Brāhmaṇas of the Rigveda<ref name=fx7_ve1_545> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 19;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 1, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 459;<br> Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 386, 387;<br> Pargiter, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1910, 50.</ref> mention is made of  [[कवष|Kavaṣa]] [[ऐलूष|Ailūṣa]], who was a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] born of a female slave, and was reproached on this ground by the other [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]]. He is possibly identical with the [[कवष|Kavaṣa]] of the Rigveda.

कश
<u>'''Kaśa'''</u> is the name of an unknown animal mentioned as a victim at the horse sacrifice in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve1_546> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 17, 1;<br> 18, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 26;<br> 38. ''Cf.'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 84.</ref>

कशीका
<u>'''Kaśīkā'''</u> is name of an animal mentioned once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_547> i. 126, 5.</ref> and interpreted as ‘weasel’ by the commentator Sāyaṇa. Fick<ref name=fx2_ve1_547> Bezzenberger, ''Beiträge,'' 3, 165;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 247. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 84;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 57.</ref> suggests that the meaning is ‘pole-cat.’ Geldner<ref name=fx3_ve1_547> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 44.</ref> takes it as ‘female ichneumon.’

कशिपु
<u>'''Kaśipu'''</u> denotes a ‘mat’ or ‘cushion’ made, according to the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_548> vi. 138, 5.</ref> by women from reeds (''[[नड|naḍa]]''), which they crushed for the purpose by means of stones. On the other hand, the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_548> xiii. 4, 3, 1.</ref> refers to a mat as made of gold.

कशु
<u>'''Kaśu'''</u> is the name of a prince mentioned in the Rigveda with the patronymic [[चैद्य|Caidya]], or descendant of '''Cedi,''' as a generous patron of the singer, who praises the liberality of the Cedis. Neither this king nor the Cedis appear again in Vedic literature.<br><br>^1) viii. 5, 37. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 129.<br>==Foot Notes==

कशो-जू
<u>'''Kaśo-jū'''</u> occurs once in the Rigveda (i. 112, 14) either as a proper name or as an epithet of '''Divodāsa.''' The sense of the word is quite uncertain.<br>==Foot Notes==

कश्यप
<u>'''Kaśyapa,'''</u> a word denoting ‘tortoise,’ occurs in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_551> iv. 20. 7.</ref> and often later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_551> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 18;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 37;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 5, 1, 5;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 86;<br> Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 17, 403.</ref> 

कश्यप
<u>'''Kaśyapa'''</u> is the name of a sage who is mentioned only once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_552> ix. 114, 2.</ref> but is a common figure in the later Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx2_ve1_552> [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]], i. 1, 2, 4, 10;<br> 4, 2, 3, 2 (but in these passages the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' accepts the sense of a divine being, identical with Prajāpati);<br> Av. i. 14, 4;<br> ii. 33, 7;<br> iv. 20, 7;<br> 29, 3;<br> 37, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 9, Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 62.</ref> He is always of a mythical character, as belonging to the distant past. According to the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_552> viii. 21;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 7, 1, 15.</ref> he anointed King '''[[विश्वकर्मन् भौवन|Viśvakarman Bhauvana]],''' and in the Upaniṣads<ref name=fx4_ve1_552> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 2, 6;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 3, 1 (in a quotation).</ref> he is mentioned as a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]]. The Kaśyapas appear in connexion with '''[[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx5_ve1_552> vii. 27. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 235, n. 1.</ref>

कश्यप नैध्रुवि
<u>'''Kaśyapa Naidhruvi'''</u> is mentioned as a teacher in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_553> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 33 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 5, 3, [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref>

कष्कष
<u>'''Kaṣkaṣa'''</u> designates a kind of worm in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_554> v. 23, 7. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98.</ref>

कसर्णील
<u>'''Kasarṇīla'''</u> is the name of a kind of snake in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_555> x. 4, 5, where the Paippalāda recension has ''kvaṣarṣṇīla.''</ref> It occurs also in the form Kasarṇīra, personified as the seer Kasarṇīra Kādraveya in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Sāṃhita.<ref name=fx2_ve1_555> i. 5, 4, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 607.</ref>

क-स्तम्भी
<u>'''Ka-stambhī'''</u> denotes in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_556> i. 1, 2, 9. ''Cf.'' Caland and Henry, ''L'Agniṣṭoma,'' 49;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 14, n. 1.</ref> a piece of wood used as a prop for the end of a wagon-pole to rest on.

कहोड कौषीतकि
<u>'''Kahoḍa Kauṣītaki'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_557> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 3, 1;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, xv.</ref> or '''Kauṣītakeya'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_557> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 5, 1.</ref> is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_557/> the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_557/> and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx1_ve1_557/> as a teacher, contemporary with [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]]. ''Cf.'' '''[[काहोडि|Kāhoḍi]].''' 

काकम्बीर
<u>'''Kākambīra'''</u> is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_558> vi. 48, 17. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 62.</ref> of a useful tree of some kind.

काक्ष-सेनि
<u>'''Kākṣa-seni'''</u> is the patronymic (‘son of '''Kakṣasena’''') of '''Abhipratārin''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiv. 1, 12).<br>==Foot Notes==

काक्षीवत
<u>'''Kākṣīvata.'''</u> See '''[[नोधस्|Nodhas]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

काठक
<u>'''Kāṭhaka,'''</u> the name of the recension of the Black [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] belonging to the school of the Kaṭhas, is mentioned in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_561> x. 4.</ref> of [[यास्क|Yāska]] and in the Anupada [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_561> iii. 11;<br> vii. 11.</ref> The Saṃhitā which bears the name has been in part edited by L. v. Schroeder.<ref name=fx3_ve1_561> Two volumes have so far appeared, the first containing i-xviii, the second xix-xxx. ''Cf. Indische Studien,'' 1, 44;<br> 3, 451;<br> von Schroeder, [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, 1900, 1909;<br> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 49, 145171;<br> ''Die Tübinger Kaṭha-Handschriften,'' Vienna, 1898;<br> ''Zwei Handschriften der K.K. Hofbiblliothek in Wien mit Fragmenten des [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]],'' Vienna, 1896.</ref>

काण्ठे-विद्धि
<u>'''Kāṇṭhe-viddhi'''</u> (‘descendant of Kaṇṭheviddha’) is mentioned as a teacher in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_562> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 382.</ref>

काण्ड-वीणा
<u>'''Kāṇḍa-vīṇā,'''</u> the name of a musical instrument, a kind of lute made out of joints of reed, which is mentioned as used at the Mahāvrata ceremony in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_563> xxxiv. 5 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 477). ''Cf.'' Lāṭyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 2, 6;<br> Kātyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 3, 16;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvii, 3, 12.</ref>

काण्ड्विय
<u>'''Kāṇḍviya'''</u> is mentioned as an Udgātṛ in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 10, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

काण्व
<u>'''Kāṇva.'''</u> See '''[[कण्व|Kaṇva]]:''' among others, '''Devātithi, [[मेधातिथि|Medhātithi]], [[वत्स|Vatsa]],''' were prominent members of the [[कण्व|Kaṇva]] family. <br>==Foot Notes==

काण्वी-पुत्र
<u>'''Kāṇvī-putra'''</u> is mentioned as a pupil of '''[[कापीपुत्र|Kāpīputra]]''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_566> vi. 5, 1 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension).</ref>

काण्वायन
<u>'''Kāṇvāyana'''</u> (‘descendant of Kaṇva’) and '''Kāṇvyāyana''' (‘descendant of Kāṇvya’) are patronymics occurring in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_567> viii. 55, 4.</ref> and the Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_567> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 38;<br> Sāyaṇa on Rv. i. 51, 1;<br> viii. 2, 40.</ref> respectively.

कात्यायनि
<u>'''Kātyāyani.'''</u> See '''Dakṣa.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कात्यायनी
<u>'''Kātyāyanī'''</u> is the name of one of the two wives of '''[[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]]''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_569> ii. 4, 1;<br> iv. 5, 1. 2. A Kātya appears in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 15 ''et seq.'' See Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 138.</ref>

कात्यायनी-पुत्र
<u>'''Kātyāyanī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of [[कात्यायनी|Kātyāyanī]],’ is mentioned in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_570> vi. 5, 1, [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref> as a pupil of '''[[गोतमीपुत्र|Gotamīputra]]''' and of '''[[कौशिकीपुत्र|Kauśikīputra]].''' A [[जातूकर्ण्य|Jātūkarṇya]] [[कात्यायनीपुत्र|Kātyāyanīputra]] is named as a teacher in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx2_ve1_570> viii. 10. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 138.</ref>

कानान्ध
<u>'''Kānāndha'''</u> is mentioned in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] xxi. 10) as son of '''[[वध्र्य्अश्व|Vadhryaśva]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कानीत
<u>'''Kānīta'''</u> is the patronymic (‘son of Kanīta’) in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_572> viii. 46, 21, 24. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 11, 23.</ref> of '''[[पृथुश्रवस्|Pṛthuśravas]].'''

कानीन
<u>'''Kānīna'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_573> v. 5, 8. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 334.</ref> apparently denotes the ‘son of a maiden.’ See '''Pati.''' 

काण्डा-विष
<u>'''Kāṇḍā-viṣa'''</u> in the Atharvaveda (x. 4, 22) denotes some kind of poison. ''Cf.'' '''[[कनक्नक|Kanaknaka]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कापटव सु-नीथ
<u>'''Kāpaṭava Su-nītha'''</u> is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_575> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 383.</ref> as a pupil of '''Sutemanas [[शाण्डिल्यायन|Śāṇḍilyāyana]].'''

कापिलेय
<u>'''Kāpileya.'''</u>--The Kāpileyas and the '''Bābhravas''' are mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_576> vii. 17. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 216, n., 433.</ref> as descendants of '''[[देवरात|Devarāta]] [[वैश्वामित्र|Vaiśvāmitra]],''' the adoptive name of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]].'''

कापी-पुत्र
<u>'''Kāpī-putra'''</u> (‘son of Kāpī’) is mentioned in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 5, 1) as a pupil of '''[[आत्रेयीपुत्र|Ātreyīputra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कापेय
<u>'''Kāpeya'''</u> (‘descendant of Kapi’). The Kāpeyas are mentioned as priests of '''[[चित्ररथ|Citraratha]]''' in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_578> xiii. 12.</ref> and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_578> xx. 12, 5. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 52, 53;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 157.</ref> See also '''[[शौनक|Śaunaka]].'''

काप्य
<u>'''Kāpya'''</u> (‘descendant of Kapi’) is the patronymic of [[सनक|Sanaka]] and [[नवक|Navaka]], two obviously fictitious persons who served at the Sattra (‘sacrificial session’) of the Vibhindukīyas in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_579> iii. 233.</ref> It is also the patronymic of Patañcala in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upanisad.<ref name=fx2_ve1_579> iii. 3, 1;<br> 7, 1. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 126, 137.</ref> See also '''Kaiśerya.'''

काबन्धि
<u>'''Kābandhi'''</u> (‘descendant of Kabandha’) is the patronymic of '''Vicārin''' in the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 2, 9. 18).<br>==Foot Notes==

काम-प्रि
<u>'''Kāma-pri'''</u> (descendant of Kāmapra’) is the patronymic of '''Marutta''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 21). In the St. Petersburg Dictionary it is suggested that the reading in this passage should be ''kāmapre,'' ‘fulfilling desires,’ as an epithet of the sacrifice (''yajñe''). <br>==Foot Notes==

कामलायन
<u>'''Kāmalāyana'''</u> (‘descendant of Kamala’) is the patronymic of '''Upakosala''' in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iv. 10, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

काम्पील
<u>'''Kāmpīla.'''</u>--In one passage of the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_583> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 19, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 12, 20;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], iv. 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 18;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 9, 6;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 2, 8, 3.</ref> the epithet [[काम्पील|Kāmpīla]]-vāsinī is applied to a woman, perhaps the king's [[महिषी|Mahiṣī]] or chief wife, whose duty it was to sleep beside the slaughtered animal at the horse sacrifice ([[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]]). The exact interpretation of the passage is very uncertain, but both Weber<ref name=fx2_ve1_583> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 184;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 114, 115.</ref> and Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve1_583> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 36, 37. So also Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 204;<br> von Schroeder, Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, 1, xxi;<br> ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 164;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 321, 322.</ref> agree in regarding [[काम्पील|Kāmpīla]] as the name of the town known as Kāmpīlya in the later literature, and the capital of [[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]] in [[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]].

काम्बोज
<u>'''Kāmboja'''</u> (‘native of '''[[कम्बोज|Kamboja]]'''’) '''[[औपमन्यव|Aupamanyava]]''' (‘descendant of Upamanyu’) is mentioned as a teacher in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_584> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372;<br> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 45: Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 102.</ref>

कारपचव
<u>'''Kārapacava'''</u> is the name in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_585> xxv. 10, 23. ''Cf.'' Āśvalāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 6;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 29, 25;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxiv. 6, 10;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 34.</ref> of a place on the '''[[यमुना|Yamunā]].'''

कारस्कर
<u>'''Kāraskara'''</u> is the name of a people mentioned in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_586> xx. 13. (14). ''Cf.'' [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 2, 14.</ref> and the Āpastamba<ref name=fx2_ve1_586> xxii. 6, 18.</ref> and Hiraṇyakeśi<ref name=fx3_ve1_586> xvii. 6, ''Cf.'' Bühler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 14, 148;<br> Caland, ''Zcitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 56, 553.</ref> Sūtras. 

कारि
<u>'''Kāri'''</u> is the name of one of the victims of the human sacrifice (Puruṣamedha) in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve1_587> xxx. 6. 20;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 2, 1.</ref> and is there dedicated to ‘laughter.’ The commentator Mahīdhara<ref name=fx2_ve1_587> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> interprets the word as ‘worker’ (''karaṇa-śīla''), but the St. Petersburg Dictionary suggests that it means a ‘jubilant’ person (as derived from the root ''kṛ,'' ‘to praise’).

कारीरदि
<u>'''Kārīradi'''</u> is the name of persons mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ii. 4, 4) as holding a special view of the Udgītha ([[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]] Chant).<br>==Foot Notes==

कारु
<u>'''Kāru,'''</u> ‘poet,’ is a word almost confined to the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_589> i. 148, 2;<br> 165, 12;<br> 177, 5;<br> 178, 3;<br> ii. 43, 1;<br> iii. 33, 8;<br> 39, 7;<br> v. 33, 7;<br> vii. 27;<br> 68, 9;<br> 72, 4, etc.: Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 8, 7;<br> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 21.</ref> There is evidence that the poet was regarded as a professional man, just as much as the physician ('''[[भिषज्|Bhiṣaj]]''').<ref name=fx2_ve1_589> ix. 112. 3.</ref> The poets, no doubt, mainly lived at the courts of princes amid their retainers,<ref name=fx3_ve1_589> vii. 73. 1.</ref> though they would probably also sing the praises of rich merchants. There was probably no essential connexion between the priest and the poet. Though the priest was often a poet, yet poetry can hardly have been restricted to the priestly caste. Indeed, at the horse sacrifice ([[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]]) the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_589> xiii. 1, 5, 1;<br> 4, 3, 5.</ref> expressly requires that one of the singers of panegyrics should be a [[राजन्य|Rājanya]], while the other was a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], both singing verses of their own composition. The Anukramaṇī (Index) in several cases<ref name=fx5_ve1_589> ''E.g.,'' x. 92 is attributed to [[शार्यात|Śāryāta]] [[मानव|Mānava]].</ref> attributes hymns of the Rigveda to princes; and even though this may often be merely the same sort of procedure<ref name=fx6_ve1_589> See Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 202.</ref> as has made Śūdraka the author of the Mṛcchakaṭikā, or Harṣa of the Ratnāvalī, and has given us royal teachers of the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] doctrine,<ref name=fx7_ve1_589> Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 20, n. 4, sees in Av. xx. a recension of [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] character. He also finds Kṣatriyas in '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]''' and '''[[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]],''' but hardly with reason. ''Cf.'' '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]].'''</ref> still the Indian tradition evidently saw nothing odd in the idea of nonBrāhmaṇas as poets. Most of the non-sacred poetry has,  however, disappeared, for the epic is a product, as it stands, of a later period. See also '''[[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]].'''

कारोतर
<u>'''Kārotara'''</u> appears to denote in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_590> i. 116, 7.</ref> and occasionally later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_590> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 16, 82;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 9, 1, 2;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 280.</ref> a ‘filter’ or ‘sieve’ for purifying the liquor called '''[[सुरा|Surā]].'''

कारोती
<u>'''Kārotī'''</u> is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ix. 5, 2, 15) as a place, or perhaps a river, where '''[[तुर कावषेय|Tura Kāvaṣeya]]''' made a fire-altar--that is, as a seat of the fire-cult ''par excellence.''<br>==Foot Notes==

कार्शकेयी-पुत्र
<u>'''Kārśakeyī-putra'''</u> (‘son of Kārśakeyī’) is the name of a man mentioned in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]. In the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] (vi. 5, 2) recension he is a pupil of '''[[प्राचीनयोगीपुत्र|Prācīnayogīputra]];''' in the Mādhyaṃdina (vi. 4, 33) recension his teacher's name is '''[[प्राश्नीपुत्र|Prāśnīputra]] [[आसुरिवासिन्|Āsurivāsin]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कार्ष्णायस
<u>'''Kārṣṇāyasa'''</u> (‘black metal’), a word found in the Upaniṣads,<ref name=fx1_ve1_593> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 17, 7;<br> vi. 1, 5;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 17, 3. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 52.</ref> must clearly mean ‘iron.’ See '''Ayas.'''

कार्ष्मन्
<u>'''Kārṣman,'''</u> a word meaning literally ‘furrow,’ and found only in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_594> i. 116, 17;<br> ix. 36, 1;<br> 74, 8.</ref> is the designation of the goal in the chariot race. The competitor probably turned round it and came back to the starting-place.<ref name=fx2_ve1_594> Av. ii. 14, 6. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 291, 292.</ref>

कार्ष्मर्य
<u>'''Kārṣmarya'''</u> is the name of a tree (''Gmelina arborea'') which is often alluded to in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve1_595> v. 2, 7, 3. 4;<br> vi. 2, 1, 5.</ref> the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve1_595> iii. 2, 6;<br> 7, 9.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_595> iii. 4, 1, 6;<br> 8, 2, 17;<br> iv. 3, 3, 6;<br> vii. 4, 1, 37. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 62.</ref> 

काल
<u>'''Kāla,'''</u> the generic expression for ‘time,’ first occurs in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_596> x. 42, 9.</ref> where, however, it is used only once, in the late tenth book. It is known to the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_596> xix. 53. 54.</ref> where [[काल|Kāla]] has already developed the sense of time as fate. The word is frequent in the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx3_ve1_596> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 3, 3;<br> ii. 4, 2, 4;<br> iii. 8, 3, 36;<br> vii. 2, 2, 21, etc.</ref> superseding the earlier use of '''[[ऋतु|Ṛtu]].''' The more general division of time is into ‘past’ (''bhūta''), ‘present’ (''bhavat''), and ‘future’ (''bhaviṣyat'').<ref name=fx4_ve1_596> ''E.g.,'' Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, vii. 20.</ref> For other divisons see '''Ahan, [[मास|Māsa]], [[संवत्सर|Saṃvatsara]].'''

कालका
<u>'''Kālakā'''</u> is the name of one of the victims at the horse sacrifice ([[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]]) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve1_597> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 15, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 16;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 35.</ref> variously identified with a bird<ref name=fx2_ve1_597> Mahīdhara on Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> or a chameleon.<ref name=fx3_ve1_597> Sāyaṇa on [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit. Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 99.</ref>

काल-काञ्ज
<u>'''Kāla-kāñja.'''</u>--In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_598> vi. 80, 2.</ref> mention is made of the Kālakāñjas as being in the sky. Both Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_598> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> and Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve1_598> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 353.</ref> hold that some constellation is meant. But as the defeat of the Kālakāñjas is one of Indra's exploits,<ref name=fx4_ve1_598> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, viii. 1, ''Cf.'' also Maitrāyanī Saṃhitā, i. 6, 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 2, 4-6;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii, 1.</ref> it is doubtful whether any stress can be laid on that interpretation of the passage in the Atharvaveda. Whitney<ref name=fx5_ve1_598> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 341.</ref> suggests that the three stars of Orion are meant, Bloomfield<ref name=fx6_ve1_598> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 500;<br> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 163-169.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 410, 414 ''et seq.;<br>'' 3, 465;<br> Oertel, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 121.</ref> that the galaxy or the stars in general are intended. 

कावषेय
<u>'''Kāvaṣeya'''</u> (‘descendant of Kavaṣa’) is the constant patronymic of '''Tura.''' The Kāvaṣeyas are also mentioned as teachers of philosophical points in the Rigveda Āraṇyakas.<ref name=fx1_ve1_599> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 6;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, viii. 11.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 391, n.;<br> 2, 418;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 257.</ref>

काव्य
<u>'''Kāvya'''</u> (‘descendant of Kavi’) is the constant<ref name=fx1_ve1_600> Rv. i. 51, 11;<br> 83, 5;<br> 121, 12;<br> vi. 20. 11;<br> viii. 23, 17;<br> Av. iv. 29, 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 8, 5, etc.</ref> patronymic of '''Uśanas.''' In the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] it is also applied to '''Iḍhat'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_600> xiv. 9, 16.</ref> and '''Ukṣṇorandhra.'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_600> xiii. 9, 19.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 48, 49.</ref>

काश
<u>'''Kāśa.'''</u>--Roth<ref name=fx1_ve1_601> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> finds this word, which denotes a species of grass (''Saccharum spontaneum'') used for mats, etc., in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_601> x. 100, 10.</ref> but the reading is uncertain. The word has this sense in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx3_ve1_601> vi. 9, 1.</ref>

काशि
<u>'''Kāśi, Kāśya.'''</u>--The name [[काशि|Kāśi]] denotes (in the plural<ref name=fx1_ve1_602> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 19. 21. The plural occurs also in the Paippalāda recension of the Atharvaveda, v. 22, 14.</ref>) the people of [[काशि|Kāśi]] (Benares), and Kāśya, the king of [[काशि|Kāśi]]. The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_602> xiii. 5, 4, 19.</ref> tells of '''[[धृतराष्ट्र|Dhṛtarāṣṭra]],''' king of [[काशि|Kāśi]], who was defeated by '''[[शतानीक सात्राजित|Śatānīka Sātrājita]],''' with the result that the Kāśis, down to the time of the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], gave up the kindling of the sacred fire. [[सात्राजित|Sātrājita]] was a '''[[भरत|Bharata]].''' We hear also of '''[[अजातशत्रु|Ajātaśatru]]''' as a king of [[काशि|Kāśi]];<ref name=fx3_ve1_602> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1, 1;<br> iii. 8, 2;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1.</ref> and no doubt '''Bhadrasena Ajātaśatrava,''' a contemporary of '''Uddālaka,''' was also a king of [[काशि|Kāśi]].<br><br>The Kāśis and '''Videhas''' were closely connected, as was natural in view of their geographical position. The compound name [[काशि|Kāśi]]-[[विदेह|Videha]] occurs in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]];<ref name=fx4_ve1_602> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_602> iii. 8, 2.</ref> '''Gārgī''' describes [[अजातशत्रु|Ajātaśatru]] as either a [[काशि|Kāśi]] or a [[विदेह|Videha]] king. The [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx6_ve1_602> xvi. 29, 5.</ref>  mentions one [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] as acting for the kings of [[काशि|Kāśi]], [[कोसल|Kosala]], and [[विदेह|Videha]]; and the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx7_ve1_602> xxi. 13.</ref> mentions [[काशि|Kāśi]] and [[विदेह|Videha]] in close proximity. Weber,<ref name=fx8_ve1_602> ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 212, 213.</ref> indeed, throws out the suggestion that the Kāśis and the Videhas together constitute the '''Uśīnaras,''' whose name is very rare in Vedic literature.<br><br>As [[कोसल|Kosala]] and [[विदेह|Videha]] were in close connexion, [[काशि|Kāśi]] and [[कोसल|Kosala]] are found combined in the compound name KāśiKauśalyas of the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx9_ve1_602> i. 2, 9.</ref><br><br>Though [[काशि|Kāśi]] is a late word, it is quite possible that the town is older, as the river '''[[वरणावती|Varaṇāvatī]]''' referred to in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx10_ve1_602> iv. 7. 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 20;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 376.</ref> may be connected with the later Vārāṇasī (Benares).<br><br>It is significant that while the Kāśis, Kosalas, and Videhas were united, any relations which the Kuru-Pañcala peoples may have had with them were hostile. It is a fair conclusion that between these two great groups of peoples there did exist some political conflict as well as probably a difference of culture in some degree. The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx11_ve1_602> i. 4, 1, 10 ''et seq. Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 170 ''et seq.;<br>'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xlii ''et seq.,'' 104, n. 1.</ref> in the story of the advance of Āryan civilization over [[कोसल|Kosala]] and [[विदेह|Videha]], preserves a clear tradition of this time, and a piece of evidence that in the Kuru-[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]] country lay the real centre of the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] culture (see also '''Kuru-[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]]'''). That the [[कोसल|Kosala]]-Videhas were originally settlers of older date than the Kuru-Pañcālas is reasonably obvious from their geographical position, but the true [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] culture appears to have been brought to them from the Kuru-Pañcala country. It is very probable that the East was less Āryan than the West, and that it was less completely reduced under Brahmin spiritual supremacy, as the movement of Buddhism was Eastern, and the Buddhist texts<ref name=fx12_ve1_602> See Fick, ''Die seciale Gliederung,'' chap. iv.</ref> reveal a position in which the Kṣatriyas rank above Brāhmaṇas. With this agrees the fact that the later Vedic texts<ref name=fx13_ve1_602> Kātyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxii. 4, 22;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 6, 28. See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 99;<br> Fick, ''op. cit.,'' 140, n. 1;<br> and ''of.'' '''[[मगध|Magadha]].'''</ref> display  towards the people of [[मगध|Magadha]] a marked antipathy, which may be reasonably explained by that people's lack of orthodoxy, and which may perhaps be traced as far back as the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx14_ve1_602> xxx. 5. 22. See '''[[मगध|Magadha]].'''</ref> It is, of course, possible that the [[कोसल|Kosala]]-Videhas and Kāśis actually were merely offshoots of the tribes later known as the Kuru-Pañcālas, and that they by reason of distance and less complete subjugation of the aborigines lost their Brahminical culture. This hypothesis, however, appears less likely, though it might be supported by a literal interpretation of the legend of the Aryan migration in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx15_ve1_602> ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''loc. cit.,'' 104, n. 1. ''Cf.'' Grierson, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 837, 1143;<br> Keith, ''ibid.,'' 831, 1138;<br> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 402 ''et seq.''</ref>

कास्यप
<u>'''Kāsyapa'''</u> (‘descendant of Kaśyapa’) is a common patronymic,<ref name=fx1_ve1_603> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 5, 1, 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 18;<br> x. 1, 8, etc.</ref> and is applied specially to '''Ṛśyaśṛṅga, Devataras [[श्यावसायन|Śyāvasāyana]], [[शूष वाह्नेय|Śūṣa Vāhneya]].'''

काश्यपी-बालाक्या-माठरी-पुत्र
<u>'''Kāśyapī-bālākyā-[[माठरी|māṭharī]]-putra'''</u> (‘son of Kāśyapī, Bālākyā, and Māṭharī’). This curious name is given in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_604> vi. 4, 31 (Mādhyaṃdina recension).</ref> to a teacher, pupil of '''[[कौत्सीपुत्र|Kautsīputra]].'''

काषायण
<u>'''Kāṣāyaṇa'''</u> is mentioned in the second [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] as a teacher, pupil of [[सायकायन|Sāyakāyana]] according to the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] (iv. 6, 2), of [[सौकरायण|Saukarāyaṇa]] according to the Mādhyaṃdina recension (iv. 5, 27).<br>==Foot Notes==

काष्ठा
<u>'''Kāṣṭhā'''</u> seems to have the sense in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_606> i. 37, 10;<br> 65, 3;<br> iv. 58, 7;<br> vi. 46, 1;<br> vii. 93, 3;<br> viii. 80, 8;<br> ix. 21, 7.</ref> of ‘course’ for a chariot race. It also means in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_606> x. 102, 9, is perhaps so to be taken.</ref> and later<ref name=fx3_ve1_606> Av. ii. 14, 6: [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 9, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ix. 13;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 7;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 7, 2. etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 291, 292;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 77.</ref> ‘goal,’ either like the '''[[कार्ष्मन्|Kārṣman]]''' the turning place, or the final goal (''paramā [[काष्ठा|kāṣṭhā]]''). 

कास्
<u>'''Kās, Kāsa, Kāsā, Kāsikā.'''</u>--All these four forms<ref name=fx1_ve1_607> [[कास्|Kās]]: Av. i. 12, 3;<br> v. 22, 10;<br> '''Kāsa:''' Av. v. 22, 11 (probably);<br> Kāsā: Av. vi. 105, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' Kāsikā: Av, v. 22, 12;<br> xi. 2, 22.</ref> of the same word denote ‘cough,’ which is mentioned in the Atharvaveda as accompanying a headache,<ref name=fx2_ve1_607> Av. i. 12, 3.</ref> as a symptom in fever ('''[[तक्मन्|Takman]]'''),<ref name=fx3_ve1_607> v. 22, 10.</ref> and as an independent disease.<ref name=fx4_ve1_607> vi. 105.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 385;<br> Grohmann, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 394;<br> Jolly, ''Medicin,'' 89.</ref>

काहोडि
<u>'''Kāhoḍi'''</u> (‘descendant of Kahoḍa’) is the patronymic of '''[[अर्गल|Argala]]''' in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā (xxv. 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

किंशुक
<u>'''Kiṃśuka'''</u> is the name of a tree (''Butea frondosa'') mentioned in the wedding hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_609> x. 85, 20. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 62. Sāyaṇa thinks the meaning is that the car is made of the wood of the tree.</ref> the bridal car being described as adorned with its blossoms (''su-[[किंशुक|kiṃśuka]]'').

किकि-दीवि
<u>'''Kiki-dīvi'''</u> denotes some kind of bird, perhaps the blue jay.<ref name=fx1_ve1_610> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' See Rv. x. 97, 13.</ref> According to the commentator, it means ‘partridge’ (''tittiri'') in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve1_610> v. 6, 22, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 92;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 251.</ref>

कितव
<u>'''Kitava,'''</u> ‘the gambler,’ is frequently referred to in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_611> ii. 29, 5;<br> v. 85, 8;<br> x. 34, 3. 7. 10. 11. 13.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_611> Av. vii. 50, 1;<br> 109, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 8. 18. 22;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 19, etc.</ref> A father is represented as chastising his son for gambling.<ref name=fx3_ve1_611> Rv. ii. 29, 5. ''Cf.'' '''[[पितृ|Pitṛ]].'''</ref> The gambler seems at times to have fallen, along with his family, into servitude, presumably by selling himself to pay his debts.<ref name=fx4_ve1_611> Rv. x. 34. ''Cf.'' perhaps the ''bhaktadāsa,'' ‘slave for hire,’ of the [[मानव|Mānava]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] Sāstra, viii. 415;<br> Fick, ''Die sociale Gliederung,'' 197.</ref> Technical names<ref name=fx5_ve1_611> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 3, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 18.</ref> for different sorts of gamblers given in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās are Ādinava-[[दर्श|darśa]],  Kalpin, Adhi-kalpin, and [[सभा-स्थाणु|Sabhā-sthāṇu]]. None of these can be safely<ref name=fx6_ve1_611> ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 18, 282;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 284.</ref> explained, though the last has usually<ref name=fx7_ve1_611> So Mahīdhara on Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 18;<br> Sāyaṇa on [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 16, 1.</ref> been taken as a satirical name derived from the gambler's devotion to the dicing place ('''[[सभा|Sabhā]]'''), ‘pillar of the dicing hall.’ The first literally means ‘seeing ill-luck,’<ref name=fx8_ve1_611> ''Cf.'' Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Weber, ''loc. cit.''</ref> and may refer to the quickness of the dicer to note an error on the part of his antagonist, or to his eagerness to see the defeat of his rival.

किं-पुरुष
<u>'''Kiṃ-puruṣa,'''</u> lit. ‘what sort of man,’ appears in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve1_612> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 8;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 3, 9;<br> vii. 5, 2, 32.</ref> to designate the ‘ape,’ which is a mimic man. Possibly the same sense should be seen in the passage of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve1_612> xxx. 16;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 12, 1.</ref> where it occurs, and where Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_612> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> assumes it to refer to a contemptible man. Max Müller<ref name=fx4_ve1_612> ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 420.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 246;<br> ''Omina und Portenta,'' 356;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 51, n. 3.</ref> renders it ‘savage.’

कियाम्बु
<u>'''Kiyāmbu'''</u> is the name of one of the water-plants which are to grow, according to a funeral hymn in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_613> x. 16, 13 = Av. xviii. 3, 6.</ref> on the place where the body of the dead was burned. The word seems to mean ‘having some water,’ possibly by popular etymology.<ref name=fx2_ve1_613> ''Cf.'' Sāyaṇa on Rv., ''loc. cit.,'' and on [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, vi. 4, 1, 2, where Kyāmbu is the form.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 62;<br> Bloomfield, ''Proceedings of the American Oriental Society,'' October, 1890, xl.</ref>

किरात
<u>'''1. Kirāta'''</u> is a name applied to a people living in the caves of the mountains, as appears clearly from the dedication of the [[किरात|Kirāta]] to the caves (''guhā'') in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve1_614> xxx. 16;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 12, 1.</ref> and from the reference in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_614> x. 4, 14.</ref> to a [[किरात|Kirāta]] girl (''[[कैरातिका|kairātikā]]''), who digs a remedy on the ridges of the mountains.  Later<ref name=fx3_ve1_614> Lassen, ''Indische Alterthumskunde,'' 1^2, 530, 534.</ref> the people called Kirātas were located in Eastern Nepal, but the name seems to have been applied to any hill folk, no doubt aborigines, though the [[मानव|Mānava]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] Śāstra<ref name=fx4_ve1_614> x. 44.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 32;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 207;<br> V. Smith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Socicty,'' 1909, 258, n. 1;<br> Lévi, ''Le Népal,'' 2, 77.</ref> regards them as degraded Kṣatriyas.

किरात
<u>'''2. Kirāta.'''</u>--In the story of '''Asamāti''' there appear, as the two priests who are opposed to the '''Gaupāyanas,''' [[किरात|Kirāta]] and '''Akuli''' according to the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_615> xiii. 12, 5 (where the text reads ''[[किरात|kirāta]]-kulyau''). Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' takes the word, with Sāyaṇa, as an adjective, ''[[किरात|kirāta]]-kula,'' ‘of the family of [[किरात|Kirāta]].’ The reading in the Bṛhaddevatā (vii. 86) is ''kirātākulī.''</ref> or [[किलात|Kilāta]] and [[आकुलि|Ākuli]] according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_615> i. 1, 4, 14 (where the text reads ''kilātākulī''). ''Cf.'' also Sāṭyāyanaka [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] ''apud'' Sāyaṇa on Rv. x. 57, 1;<br> 60, 1;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 167;<br> ''Journal of the American Oriental Socicty,'' 18, 41 ''et seq.;<br>'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 48, n. 1.</ref> No doubt the name is chosen, not as that of a historic person, but as a suitable designation of a hostile priest; for it is probably identical with the name of the mountaineers described in the preceding article.

किलात
<u>'''Kilāta'''</u> is the form of the name 2. '''[[किरात|Kirāta]]''' that appears in the Śatapatha, Śāṭyāyanaka, and Jaiminīya Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve1_616> See note^2 under the preceding article.</ref>

किलास
<u>'''Kilāsa'''</u> is the name of a disease, ‘white leprosy,’ in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_617> i. 23, 24.</ref> and the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, etc.<ref name=fx2_ve1_617> xxx. 21;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 3, 17;<br> xxiii. 11, 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 4, 12. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 391;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 266;<br> Jolly, ''Medicin,'' 98;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 68.</ref> It resulted in the appearance of grey (''[[पलित|palita]]'') and white (''[[शुक्ल|śukla]], śveta'') spots all over the skin. Haug gave the same sense to ''alasa'' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_617> vi. 33, 5.</ref> but this is doubtful. The fem. Kilāsī is taken by Max Müller to mean a ‘spotted deer’ in one passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx4_ve1_617> v. 53, 1.</ref> 

कीकट
<u>'''Kīkaṭa.'''</u>--The name of this people occurs only in one passage of the Rigveda, where they appear as hostile to the singer and as under the leadership of '''[[प्रमगन्द|Pramaganda]].''' [[यास्क|Yāska]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_618> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 32.</ref> declares that [[कीकट|Kīkaṭa]] was the name of a non-Āryan country, and later<ref name=fx3_ve1_618> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> [[कीकट|Kīkaṭa]] is given as a synonym of [[मगध|Magadha]]. Hence Zimmer<ref name=fx4_ve1_618> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 31, 118. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Rigveda, Kommentar,'' 58.</ref> concludes that the Kīkaṭas were a non-Āryan people living in the country later known as [[मगध|Magadha]]. Weber<ref name=fx5_ve1_618> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 186;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 79, n. *.</ref> holds that this people were located in [[मगध|Magadha]], but were Āryan, though at variance with other Āryan tribes, perhaps because of heretical tendencies, for [[मगध|Magadha]] was later a seat of Buddhism. But the identification is uncertain, and is doubted by Oldenberg<ref name=fx6_ve1_618> ''Buddha,'' 402, 403;<br> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 253.</ref> and Hillebrandt.<ref name=fx7_ve1_618> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 14-18.</ref><br><br>^1 iii. 53, 14.

कीट
<u>'''Kīṭa'''</u> is the name of a species of worm mentioned in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_619> ix. 4, 16.</ref> and frequently in the Upaniṣads.<ref name=fx2_ve1_619> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 19;<br> 2, 14;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 9. 3;<br> 10, 2;<br> vii. 2, 1;<br> 7, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 2, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98.</ref>

कीनाश
<u>'''Kīnāśa,'''</u> a name of the ploughman or cultivator of the soil, is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_620> iv. 57, 8.</ref> and the later Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx2_ve1_620> Av. iv. 11, 10;<br> vi. 30, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 8, 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 237;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 45;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 86, n.</ref> See '''[[कृषि|Kṛṣi]].'''

कीरि
<u>'''Kīri'''</u> is in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_621> i. 31, 13;<br> ii. 12, 6;<br> v. 52, 12 (''kīriṇaḥ;<br>'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 317). But see Geldner. ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 46;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 223.</ref> a regular designation of the ‘poet.’ ''Cf.'' '''[[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]].'''

कीर्शा
<u>'''Kīrśā,'''</u> the name of some kind of animal, or perhaps bird, is mentioned in the list of victims for the horse sacrifice ([[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]]) in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_622> v. 5, 20, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 99;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> 

कीलाल
<u>'''Kīlāla,'''</u> a word denoting a ‘sweet drink,’ is found in all the later Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve1_623> Av. iv. 11, 10;<br> 26, 6;<br> 27, 5;<br> vi. 69, 1;<br> x. 6, 25;<br> xii. 1, 59;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 12, 13;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 7, 12;<br> iii. 11, 3. 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ii. 34;<br> iii. 43;<br> xx. 65;<br> xxx. 11, etc.</ref> but not in the Rigveda. As the [[सुरा-कार|Surā-kāra]], ‘maker of [[सुरा|Surā]],’ is dedicated in the list of victims in the human sacrifice<ref name=fx2_ve1_623> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 9, 1.</ref> (Puruṣamedha) to [[कीलाल|Kīlāla]], it must have been a drink of somewhat the same nature as the '''[[सुरा|Surā]]''' itself, possibly, as Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve1_623> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 281.</ref> suggests, a kind of rum.

कीश्मील
<u>'''Kīśmīla'''</u> denotes, according to Bo7htlingk,<ref name=fx1_ve1_624> Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> a certain disease in the Paippalāda recension of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_624> xix. 8, 4.</ref>

कीस्त
<u>'''Kīsta'''</u> in two passages of the '''Rigveda'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_625> i. 127, 7;<br> vi. 67, 10. ''Cf.'' [[यास्क|Yāska]], [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 15.</ref> means ‘poet,’ like '''[[कीरि|Kīri]].'''

कुक्कुट
<u>'''Kukkuṭa,'''</u> ‘cock,’ occurs in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_626> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, i. 16. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 91.</ref> only.<ref name=fx2_ve1_626> It is common in the later language.</ref>

कुटरु
<u>'''Kuṭaru'''</u> is, according to the commentator Mahīdhara,<ref name=fx1_ve1_627> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv, 23.</ref> synonymous with '''[[कुक्कुट|Kukkuṭa]],''' ‘cock.’ The word is found in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās only.<ref name=fx2_ve1_627> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 17, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 1, 6;<br> iii. 14, 4. 20;<br> iv. 1, 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 23, 39.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 93.</ref>

कुण्ड-पायिन्
<u>'''Kuṇḍa-pāyin'''</u> (‘drinking from a jug’) is the name of a teacher mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_628> xxv. 4, 4.</ref> and in the Sūtras.<ref name=fx2_ve1_628> Āśvalāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 4, 6;<br> Kātyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxiv. 4, 21.</ref> 

कुण्ड-पाय्य
<u>'''Kuṇḍa-pāyya'''</u> (‘descendant of Kuṇḍapāyin’) is a patronymic connected with a man named '''[[शृङ्गवृष्|Śṛṅgavṛṣ]]''' in one passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_629> viii. 17, 13. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 161;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 90.</ref>

कुण्डृणाची
<u>'''Kuṇḍṛṇācī'''</u> is the name of an animal of unknown character occurring in the lists of victims at the horse sacrifice ([[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]]) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve1_630> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 16, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 18;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 37.</ref> The word also occurs in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_630> i. 29, 6.</ref> in which a bird would seem to be intended, though Sāyaṇa interprets it as meaning ‘with crooked flight’ (''kuṭila-gatyā''). In his commentary on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve1_630> v. 5, 16, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 89.</ref> he takes the word to denote the houselizard (''[[गृह|gṛha]]-godhikā'').

कुत्स
<u>'''Kutsa'''</u> is the name of a hero frequently mentioned in the Rigveda, which, however, gives practically no information about him, for he was no doubt already a figure of the mythic past. He is several times<ref name=fx1_ve1_631> Rv. iv. 26, 1;<br> vii. 19, 2;<br> viii. 1, 11.</ref> called [[आर्जुनेय|Ārjuneya]], ‘descendant of Arjuna,’ and is usually<ref name=fx2_ve1_631> Rv. i. 63, 3;<br> 121, 19;<br> 174, 5;<br> 175, 4;<br> iv. 30, 4;<br> v. 29, 4;<br> vi. 20, 5;<br> vii. 19, 2;<br> x. 99, 9.</ref> associated with Indra in the exploit of defeating the demon Śuṣṇa and winning the sun. He is said<ref name=fx3_ve1_631> Rv. x. 49, 4.</ref> to have defeated '''[[स्मद्इभ|Smadibha]], [[तुग्र|Tugra]],''' and the '''Vetasus,''' but, on the other hand, he is several times<ref name=fx4_ve1_631> Rv. i. 53, 10;<br> ii. 14, 7;<br> viii. 53, 2. ''Cf.'' iv. 26, 1.</ref> mentioned with '''[[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]]''' and '''[[आयु|Āyu]]''' as being vanquished by Indra, his defeat in one passage<ref name=fx5_ve1_631> Rv. i. 53, 10.</ref> being attributed to '''[[तूर्वयाण|Tūrvayāṇa]].''' Elsewhere<ref name=fx6_ve1_631> Rv. i. 51, 6;<br> vi. 26, 3.</ref> he appears with [[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]] as a friend of Indra's. In the later literature he is seldom<ref name=fx7_ve1_631> ''E.g.,'' Av. iv. 29, 5;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 11, 26.</ref> mentioned except in connexion with the myth of his binding Indra, which is found in the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx8_ve1_631> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 2, 22;<br> Śāṭyāyanaka in Sāyaṇa on Rv. x. 38, 5;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 228;<br> Oertel. ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 31.</ref> and which is based on an obscure verse in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx9_ve1_631> x. 38, 5.</ref> <br><br>The Kutsas, or descendants of [[कुत्स|Kutsa]], are mentioned in one hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx10_ve1_631> vii. 25, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 113, 148;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 210, 211;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 284 ''et seq.,'' who suggests that perhaps two Kutsas--one a friend of Indra, and the other a foe --may be distinguished;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 171;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 57, n. 1.</ref>

कुत्स औरव
<u>'''Kutsa Aurava'''</u> (‘son of Uru’) is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_632> xiv. 6, 8.</ref> as having murdered his domestic priest (''[[पुरोहित|purohita]]''), '''[[उपगु सौश्रवस|Upagu Sauśravasa]],''' because the father of the latter insisted on paying homage to Indra. This fact may be compared with the hostility to Indra of '''[[कुत्स|Kutsa]]''' according to certain passages of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_632> See '''[[कुत्स|Kutsa]].''' ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 284;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 57;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 32.</ref>

कुन्ति
<u>'''Kunti.'''</u>--The Kuntis are referred to in an obscure and corrupt passage of the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_633> xxvi. 9. See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 471, and ''cf.'' perhaps Maitrāyaṇī aṃhitā, iv. 2, 6.</ref> as having defeated the '''Pañcālas.'''

कुबेर वारक्य
<u>'''Kubera Vārakya'''</u> is mentioned in a list of teachers in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 41, 1) as a pupil of '''[[जयन्त|Jayanta]] [[वारक्य|Vārakya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कुभा
<u>'''Kubhā'''</u> is the name of a river mentioned twice in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_635> v. 53, 9;<br> x. 75. 6. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 14;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 200.</ref> and no doubt identical with the modern Kabul river, the Greek .

कुभ्र
<u>'''Kubhra'''</u> is the name of some animal in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (ii. 5, 3). <br>==Foot Notes==

कु-मुद
<u>'''Ku-muda'''</u> is the name of a plant mentioned with other water plants in one passage of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_637> iv. 34. 5. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 70.</ref> It is no doubt the white water-lily (''Nymphœa esculenta''), being the name of that plant in post-Vedic Sanskrit also.

कुम्ब
<u>'''Kumba'''</u> is mentioned with '''[[ओपश|Opaśa]]''' and '''[[कुरीर|Kurīra]]''' as an ornament of women's hair in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_638> vi. 138, 3.</ref> Geldner<ref name=fx2_ve1_638> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 131.</ref> thinks that, like those two words, it originally meant ‘horn,’ but this is very doubtful. Indian tradition<ref name=fx3_ve1_638> Sāyaṇa on Av. vi. 138, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 265;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 538, 539;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 348;<br> Caland, ''Über das vituclle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 59.</ref> simply regards the term as denoting a female adornment connected with the dressing of the hair.

कुम्ब्या
<u>'''Kumbyā'''</u> or '''Kumvyā''' is a word mentioned after Ṛc, [[यजुस्|Yajus]], Sāman, and [[गाथा|Gāthā]] in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_639> xi. 5, 7, 10.</ref> to denote a form of speech. In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx2_ve1_639> ii. 3, 6.</ref> it appears as one of the forms of measured speech together with Ṛc and [[गाथा|Gāthā]]. The precise meaning of the term is unknown. Weber<ref name=fx3_ve1_639> ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 111, n.<br><br>''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 221;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44. 101.</ref> suggests the sense ‘refrain.’

कुम्भ
<u>'''Kumbha'''</u> is a word of frequent occurrence in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_640> i. 116, 7;<br> 117, 6;<br> vii. 33, 13, etc.</ref> as well as later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_640> Av. i. 6, 4;<br> iii. 12, 7, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 87, etc.</ref> and denotes a ‘pot.’ Usually no doubt made of clay, it was easily broken.<ref name=fx3_ve1_640> Rv. x. 89, 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 367.</ref> See also '''[[उखा|Ukhā]].'''

कुम्भी-नस
<u>'''Kumbhī-nasa'''</u> (‘pot-nosed’) is the name of an animal mentioned in the list of victims at the horse sacrifice ([[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]]) in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_641> v. 5, 14, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 95;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s. v.''</ref> Possibly some sort of snake is meant, as in the later literature. 

कुय-वाच्
<u>'''Kuya-vāc'''</u> (‘evil-speaking’) appears in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_642> i. 174, 7.</ref> to denote a demon slain by Indra, probably as a personification of the barbarian opponents of the Āryans. The expression ''[[मृध्र-वाच्|mṛdhra-vāc]]'' (‘speaking insultingly’) is similarly used of barbarians in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_642> v. 29, 10;<br> 32, 8. See [[दस्यु|Dasyu]].</ref>

कुरीर
<u>'''Kurīra,'''</u> like '''[[ओपश|Opaśa]]''' and '''[[कुम्ब|Kumba]],''' denotes some sort of female head ornament in the description of the bride's adornment in the wedding hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_643> x. 85. 8.</ref> and in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_643> vi. 138, 3.</ref> According to the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx3_ve1_643> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 5, 3: Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 7. 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xi. 56.</ref> the goddess [[सिनीवाली|Sinīvālī]] is described by the epithets ''su-kapardā, [[सु-कुरीर|su-kurīra]], sv-opaśā,'' as wearing a beautiful head-dress.<br><br>According to Geldner,<ref name=fx4_ve1_643> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 131, 132.</ref> the word originally meant ‘horn’; but this is uncertain, as this sense is not required in any passage in which the term occurs.<ref name=fx5_ve1_643> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 21 (= vaitāna [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xi. 22), cited by Geldner, is quite vague.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 265;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharanaveda,'' 539;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 348;<br> Caland, ''Über das vituelle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 59.</ref>

कुरीरिन्
<u>'''Kurīrin'''</u> (‘having a '''[[कुरीर|Kurīra]]'''’) is a word occurring in an ambiguous passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_644> v. 31, 2.</ref> in which it may be taken either as a noun meaning a ‘crested animal,’ perhaps as Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve1_644> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 91.</ref> suggests the ‘peacock,’ or as an epithet of the word '''Aja,''' ‘goat,’ in which case it might mean ‘horned.’ But even in the latter alternative a metaphorical application of the word seems sufficient, just as in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_644> xiii. 4, 3.</ref> '''[[ओपश|Opaśa]]''' is used of the horns of cattle, and thus renders unnecessary the adoption of Geldner's<ref name=fx4_ve1_644> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 130.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 457, 539;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 285;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 279.</ref> view that the original meaning of '''[[कुरीर|Kurīra]]''' is ‘horn.’ 

कुरु
<u>'''Kuru.'''</u>--The Kurus appear as by far the most important people in the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] literature. There is clear evidence that it was in the country of the Kurus, or the allied KuruPañcālas, that the great Brāhmaṇas were composed.<ref name=fx1_ve1_645> For the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 49, 50, with Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 67, 68;<br> for the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], Weber, ''loc. cit.,'' 45;<br> for the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] and Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyakas, Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 387;<br> for the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], Weber, ''loc. cit.,'' 132, ''Transactions of the Bcrlin Academy,'' 1895, 859. The Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] refers repeatedly to the Kuru-Pañcālas, whose name also occurs in the late and confused Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. For the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], see i. 8, 4, 1. 2, and for the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 6.</ref> The Kurus are comparatively seldom mentioned alone, their name being usually coupled with that of the Pañcālas on account of the intimate connexion of the two peoples. The Kuru-Pañcālas are often expressly referred to as a united nation.<ref name=fx2_ve1_645> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7, 6;<br> 8, 7;<br> iv. 7, 2;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1;<br> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], 1. 2, 9;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, x. 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xi. 3, 3 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension).</ref> In the land of the Kuru-Pañcālas speech is said to have its particular home;<ref name=fx3_ve1_645> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 3, 15.</ref> the mode of sacrifice among the Kuru-Pañcālas is proclaimed to be the best;<ref name=fx4_ve1_645> ''Ibid.,'' i. 7, 2, 8;<br> ''cf. Kuru-[[वाजपेय|vājapeya]]'' in Sāṅkhāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 3, 15;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 11, 18.</ref> the Kuru-[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]] kings perform the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]] or royal sacrifice;<ref name=fx5_ve1_645> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 2, 3. 5.</ref> their princes march forth on raids in the dewy season, and return in the hot season.<ref name=fx6_ve1_645> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], 1. 8, 4. 1, 2.</ref> Later on the Kuru-[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]] Brahmins are famous in the Upaniṣads.<ref name=fx7_ve1_645> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 78;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 30, 6;<br> iv. 6, 2;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 1, 1;<br> 9, 20, etc.</ref> Weber<ref name=fx8_ve1_645> ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 470;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 114.</ref> and Grierson<ref name=fx9_ve1_645> ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 602-607;<br> 837-844.</ref> have sought to find traces in Vedic literature of a breach between the two tribes, the latter scholar seeing therein a confirmation of the theory that the Kurus belonged to the later stream of immigrants into India, who were specially Brahminical, as opposed to the Pañcālas, who were anti-Brahminical. In support of this view, Weber refers to the story in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx10_ve1_645> x. 6. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xli.</ref> of a dispute between '''[[वक दाल्भ्य|Vaka Dālbhya]]''' and '''[[धृतराष्ट्र वैचित्रवीर्य|Dhṛtarāṣṭra Vaicitravīrya]],''' the former being held to be by origin a [[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]], while the latter is held  to be a Kuru. But there is no trace of a quarrel between Kurus and Pañcālas in the passage in question, which merely preserves the record of a dispute on a ritual matter between a priest and a prince: the same passage refers to the Naimiṣīya sacrifice among the Kuru-Pañcālas, and emphasizes the close connexion of the two peoples.<ref name=fx11_ve1_645> See Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 831-836;<br> 11381142.</ref> Secondly, Weber conjectures in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx12_ve1_645> xxiii. 18.</ref> that '''[[सुभद्रिका|Subhadrikā]]''' of '''Kāmpila''' was the chief queen of the king of a tribe living in the neighbourhood of the clan, for whose king the horse sacrifice described in the Saṃhitā was performed. But the interpretation of this passage by Weber is open to grave doubt;<ref name=fx13_ve1_645> Eggeling. ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 322.</ref> and in the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the Saṃhitā<ref name=fx14_ve1_645> xi. 3, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 114, note *.</ref> a passage used at the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]] shows that the Kuru-Pañcālas had actually one king. Moreover, there is the evidence of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx15_ve1_645> xiii. 5, 4, 7.</ref> that the old name of the Pañcālas was '''[[क्रिवि|Krivi]].''' This word looks very like a variant of Kuru, and Zimmer<ref name=fx16_ve1_645> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 103.</ref> plausibly conjectures that the Kurus and Krivis formed the '''[[वैकर्ण|Vaikarṇa]]'''<ref name=fx17_ve1_645> vii. 18, 11.</ref> of the Rigveda, especially as both peoples are found about the [[सिन्धु|Sindhu]] and the [[असिक्नी|Asiknī]].<ref name=fx18_ve1_645> Keith, ''loc. cit.,'' 835.</ref><br><br>The Kurus alone are chiefly mentioned in connexion with the locality which they occupied, '''[[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]],''' We are told, however, of a domestic priest ('''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]]''') in the service of both the Kurus and the '''Sṛñjayas,'''<ref name=fx19_ve1_645> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 4, 5.</ref> who must therefore at one time have been closely connected.<ref name=fx20_ve1_645> ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 123.</ref> In the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] reference is made to the Kurus being saved by a mare (''aśvā''),<ref name=fx21_ve1_645> iv. 17, 9: for ''aśvā'' Bo7htlingk in his edition reads ''akṣṇā,'' followed by Little, ''Grammatical Index,'' 1.</ref> and to some disaster which befel them owing to a hailstorm.<ref name=fx22_ve1_645> i. 10, 1.</ref> In the Sūtras, again, a ceremony ([[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]]) of the Kurus is mentioned.<ref name=fx23_ve1_645> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 3, 15.</ref> There also a curse, which was pronounced on them and led to their being driven from [[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]], is alluded to.<ref name=fx24_ve1_645> ''Ibid.,'' xv. 16, 11. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literathre,'' 136.</ref>  This possibly adumbrates the misfortunes of the Kauravas in the epic tradition.<br><br>In the Rigveda the Kurus do not appear under that name as a people. But mention is made of a prince, '''Kuruśravaṇa''' (‘Glory of the Kurus’),<ref name=fx25_ve1_645> Rv. x. 33, 4.</ref> and of a '''[[पाकस्थामन् कौरयाण|Pākasthāman Kaurayāṇa]].'''<ref name=fx26_ve1_645> Rv. viii. 3, 21.</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx27_ve1_645> xx. 127, 7 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[खिल|Khila]], v. 10.</ref> there occurs as a king of the Kurus '''[[परिक्षित्|Parikṣit]],''' whose son, '''[[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]],''' is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx28_ve1_645> xiii. 5, 4.</ref> as one of the great performers of the horse sacrifice.<br><br>It is a probable conjecture of Oldenberg's<ref name=fx29_ve1_645> ''Buddha,'' 403, 404.</ref> that the Kuru people, as known later, included some of the tribes referred to by other names in the Rigveda. Kuruśravaṇa, shown by his name to be connected with the Kurus, is in the Rigveda called [[त्रासदस्यव|Trāsadasyava]], ‘descendant of '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]],'''’ who is well known as a king of the '''Pūrus.''' Moreover, it is likely that the [[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]]'''Bharatas,''' who appear in the Rigveda as enemies of the Pūtus, later coalesced with them to form the Kuru people.<ref name=fx30_ve1_645> ''Ibid.,'' 406-409.</ref> Since the Bharatas appear so prominently in the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] texts as a great people of the past, while the later literature ignores them in its list of nations, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that they became merged in some other tribe. Moreover, there is evidence that the Bharatas occupied the territory in which the Kurus were later found. Two of them are spoken of in a hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx31_ve1_645> iii. 23.</ref> as having kindled fire on the '''[[दृषद्वती|Dṛṣadvatī]],''' the '''[[आपया|Āpayā]],''' and the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]'''--that is to say, in the sacred places of the later [[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]]. Similarly, the goddess Bhāratī (‘belonging to the Bharatas’) is constantly mentioned in the Āprī (‘propitiatory’) hymns together with [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]].<ref name=fx32_ve1_645> ''Cf.'' Scheftelowitz, ''Die Apokṛyphen des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 145.</ref> Again, according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], one [[भरत|Bharata]] king was victorious over the Kāśis,<ref name=fx33_ve1_645> xiii. 5, 4, 11.</ref> and another made offerings to [[गङ्गा|Gaṅgā]] and [[यमुना|Yamunā]],<ref name=fx34_ve1_645> ''Ibid.,'' 21.</ref> while raids of the Bharatas against the '''Satvants''' are mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx35_ve1_645> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 25 (''cf.'' Haug's edition, 2, 128, n. 3);<br> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 407, note*.</ref> Nor is it  without importance that the Bharatas appear as a variant for the Kuru Pañcālas in a passage of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx36_ve1_645> xi. 3, 3. See note 14;<br> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 408, 409.</ref> and that in the list of the great performers of the horse sacrifice the names of one Kuru and two [[भरत|Bharata]] princes are given without any mention of the people over which they ruled, while in other cases that information is specifically given.<ref name=fx37_ve1_645> Oldenberg, 409, note*.</ref><br><br>The territory of the Kuru-Pañcālas is declared in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] to be the middle country ('''[[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]]''').<ref name=fx38_ve1_645> viii. 14. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, 392, 393.</ref> A group of the Kuru people still remained further north--the '''Uttara Kurus''' beyond the Himālaya. It appears from a passage of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] that the speech of the Northerners-that is, presumably, the Northern Kurus--and of the KuruPañcālas was similar, and regarded as specially pure.<ref name=fx39_ve1_645> iii. 2, 3, 15. This is the sense which it appears to bear, as the KuruPañcālas can bardly be reckoned as being northerly (Oldenberg, 395), and the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 6 (''Indische Studien,'' 2, 309) in independent evidence for the puro speech of the north. ''Cf.'' Eggeeling Sacred ''Books of the East,'' 12. xiii. Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 45;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 191.</ref> There seems little doubt that the Brahminical culture was developed in the country of the Kuru-Pañcālas, and that it spread thence east, south, and west. Traces of this are seen in the [[व्रात्य|Vrātya]] Stomas (sacrifices for the admission of non-Brahminical Āryans) of the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx40_ve1_645> xvii. 1, 1. See also Av. xv. with Whitney's and Lanman notes;<br> Weber, ''Ind the Studien,'' 1, 33 ''et seq.;<br> Indian Literature,'' 67, 78, 80.</ref> and in the fact that in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka it is unusual for a Brahmin to dwell in the territory of '''[[मगध|Magadha]].'''<ref name=fx41_ve1_645> vii. 13. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 400, note*;<br> Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 112, n. 126.</ref> The repeated mention of KuruPañcāla Brahmins is another indication of their missionary activity.<ref name=fx42_ve1_645> See ''e.g.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 4, 1, 2, and note 6.</ref><br><br>The geographical position of the Kuru-Pañcālas renders it probable that they were later immigrants into India than the '''[[कोसल|Kosala]]-[[विदेह|Videha]]''' or the '''Kāśis,'''<ref name=fx43_ve1_645> This is recognized, ''e.g.,'' by Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 9, 391, 398, 399;<br> Lanman, ''Sanskrit Keader,'' 297, etc. The narrative of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 1, 10 ''et seq.'' (Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 170), rather implies that the KosalaVidehas are offshoots of the KuruPañcālas, but Oldenberg and Macdonell (''Sanskrit Literature,'' 214 interpret this as referring to the spread of Vedic tradition and culture, not of nationality.</ref> who must have been pushed  into their more eastward territories by a new wave of Āryan settlers from the west. But there is no evidence in Vedic literature to show in what relation of time the immigration of the latter peoples stood to that of their neighbours on the west. It has, however, been conjectured,<ref name=fx44_ve1_645> ''Cf.'' Grierson, ''Languages of India,'' 52 ''et seq.;<br> Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 837 ''et seq.'' On the other hand, it is probably an error to assume that the Bharatas were originally situated far west of [[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]], and that the main action of the Rigveda was confined to the Panjab. When [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] celebrates the crossing of the [[विपाश्|Vipāś]] and [[शुतुद्री|Śutudrī]] (Rv. iii. 33), he probably came from the east, as Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 218, points out, and not from the west. Adopting the ordinary view, Hopkins, ''India, Old and New,'' 52, finds it necessary to suggest that [[यमुना|Yamunā]] is only another name in the Rv. for the [[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]]. But the necessity for this suggestion, which is not in itself plausible, disappears when it is realized that the Bharatas held a territory roughly corresponding to [[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]], and bounded on the east by the [[यमुना|Yamunā]]. On the other hand, Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 142, 143. places the Kurus near the Ārjīkīyā in Kaśmīr, which puts them too far north. So also Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 103, and Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xlii. It seems probable that the Kurus were at a very early period widely scattered to the north of the Himālaya, in [[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]], and about the [[सिन्धु|Sindhu]] and [[असिक्नी|Asiknī]].<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 400 ''et seq.;<br>'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 152-157;<br> von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literature und Cultur,'' 164 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 187 ''et seq.;<br> Indian Literature,'' 114, 135, 136;<br> Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 27;<br> Pargiter, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 333 ''et seq.;<br>'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 205, n.</ref> mainly on the ground of later linguistic phenomena, which have no cogency for the Vedic period, that the Kurus were later immigrants, who, coming by a new route, thrust themselves between the original Āryan tribes which were already in occupation of the country from east to west. ''Cf.'' also '''[[कृत्वन्|Kṛtvan]].''' For other Kuru princes see '''[[कौरव्य|Kauravya]].'''

कुरु-क्षेत्र
<u>'''Kuru-kṣetra'''</u> (‘land of the Kurus’) is always regarded in the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] texts<ref name=fx1_ve1_646> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 10;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 5, 13;<br> xi. 5, 1, 4;<br> xiv. 1, 1, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 30;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 4;<br> iv. 5, 9;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 126 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 11, cxlvi);<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 16, 11, etc.</ref> as a particularly sacred country. Within its boundaries flowed the rivers '''[[दृषद्वती|Dṛṣadvatī]]''' and '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]],''' as well as the '''[[आपया|Āpayā]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_646> ''Cf.'' Rv. iii. 23;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 218.</ref> Here, too, was situated '''[[शर्यणावन्त्|Śaryaṇāvant]],'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_646> See Pischel, ''loc. cit.,'' and ''cf.'' '''Ārjīkīyā.'''</ref> which  appears to have been a lake, like that known to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] by the name of '''[[अन्यतः-प्लक्षा|Anyataḥ-plakṣā]].'''<ref name=fx4_ve1_646> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 1, 4.</ref> According to Pischel, there was also in [[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]] a stream called '''[[पस्त्या|Pastyā]],'''<ref name=fx5_ve1_646> Pischel, ''loc. cit.,'' 219.</ref> which he sees in certain passages of the Rigveda. The boundaries of [[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]] are given in a passage of the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx6_ve1_646> v. 1, 1. These places cannot be further identified. See also '''Mara.'''<br><br>''Cf.'' von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 164, 165;<br> Max Mūller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 398, 399;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 78, 79;<br> Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 174. Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xli., seems to place [[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]], as lying between the [[यमुना|Yamunā]] and [[गङ्गा|Gaṅgā]], too far east.</ref> as being [[खाण्डव|Khāṇḍava]] on the south, the [[तूर्घ्न|Tūrghna]] on the north, and the [[परीणह्|Parīṇah]] on the west. Roughly speaking, it corresponded to the modern Sirhind.

कुरुङ्ग
<u>'''Kuruṅga'''</u> is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_647> viii. 4, 19;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 22.</ref> as a prince and a patron. Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_647> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 160.</ref> suggests that he was a king of the '''Anus,''' but for this theory there seems no good ground. As the '''Turvaśas''' are mentioned in the same verse, he may possibly have been one of their kings. The name suggests a connexion with the '''Kurus,''' and it may be noted that in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_647> xi. 5, 4, 16. See Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 404.</ref> the Turvaśas are connected with the '''Pañcālas (Krivis).'''

कुरु
<u>'''Kuru'''</u>-[[श्रवण|śravaṇa]] '''[[त्रासदस्यव|Trāsadasyava]]''' is alluded to as dead in a hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_648> x. 33, 4. ''Cf.'' Bṛhaddevatā, vii. 35, 36.</ref> which refers also to his son '''[[उपमश्रवस्|Upamaśravas]],''' and his father '''[[मित्रातिथि|Mitrātithi]].''' In another hymn<ref name=fx2_ve1_648> x. 32, 9. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 165: Geldner, ''Vediscke Studien,'' 2, 150, 184;<br> Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 386.</ref> he is mentioned as still alive. His name connects him on the one hand with the '''Kurus,''' and on the other with '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]]''' and the '''Pūrus.'''

कुरूरु
<u>'''Kurūru,'''</u> apparently the name of a species of worm, is mentioned twice in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_649> ii. 31, 2;<br> ix. 2, 22. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98.</ref> 

कुर्कुर
<u>'''Kurkura'''</u> is an onomatopoetic name for the dog in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_650> vii. 95, 2. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 233.</ref> See also '''[[श्वन्|Śvan]].'''

कुल
<u>'''Kula, Kula-pā.'''</u>--As an uncompounded word, Kula does not occur before the period of the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve1_651> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 2, 22;<br> ii. 1, 4, 4;<br> 4, 1, 14;<br> xi. 5, 3, 11;<br> 8, 1, 3;<br> xiii. 4, 2, 17;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 5, 32;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii., 13, 6, etc.</ref> It denotes the ‘home’ or ‘house of the family,’ and by metonymy the family itself, as connected with the home. The Kula-pā (lit. ‘house protector’), or chief of the family, is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_651> x. 179, 2.</ref> as inferior to and attendant on the '''[[व्राजपति|Vrājapati]]''' in war, the latter being perhaps the leader of the village contingent of the clan. In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_651> i. 14, 3. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 15;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Athcrvaveda,'' 252, correcting Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 314.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 162.</ref> a girl is ironically called Kulapā, because she is left without a husband in the world, and has only Yama (the god of death) for a spouse.<br><br>The use of the term Kula points clearly to a system of individual families, each no doubt consisting of several members under the headship of the father or eldest brother, whose Kula the dwelling is. As distinct from '''[[गोत्र|Gotra]],''' Kula seems to mean the family in the narrower sense of the members who still live in one house, the undivided family. ''Cf.'' '''[[गृह|Gṛha]], [[ग्राम|Grāma]], Jana, [[विश्|Viś]].'''

कुलाल
<u>'''Kulāla,'''</u> the word denoting a ‘potter,’ occurs in the [[शतरुद्रिय|Śatarudriya]], or litany to Rudra in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_652> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 27. ''Cf. [[कुलाल|kulāla]]-[[कृत|kṛta]],'' ‘made by a potter,’ Maitrāyaṇi Saṃhitā, i. 8. 3, and '''[[कौलाल|Kaulāla]].'''</ref>

कुलिश
<u>'''Kuliśa,'''</u> ‘axe,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda as used for the making of chariots,<ref name=fx1_ve1_653> iii. 2, 1.</ref> and also in warfare,<ref name=fx2_ve1_653> i. 32. 5.</ref> while the Atharvaveda refers to its employment in cutting down trees.<ref name=fx3_ve1_653> ii. 12, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 252.</ref> 

कुलीकय
<u>'''Kulīkaya'''</u> is the form in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_654> v. 5, 13, 1.</ref> of the name of an animal, apparently a kind of fish, as explained by Mahīdhara in his commentary, which is called Kulīpaya in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve1_654> xxiv. 21. 35.</ref> and [[पुरीकय|Purīkaya]] in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx3_ve1_654> xi. 2, 25. The commentator reads [[पुलीकय|Pulīkaya]], as in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 2. See Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 624.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 96.</ref> variants probably due to the faulty tradition of an unfamiliar. name.

कुलीका
<u>'''Kulīkā'''</u> is the name of a bird mentioned in the list of victims at the horse sacrifice in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_655> xxiv. 24.</ref> The Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_655> iii. 14, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 94.</ref> has [[पुलीका|Pulīkā]] instead.

कुलुङ्ग
<u>'''Kuluṅga'''</u> is the name of an animal, perhaps a gazelle, mentioned in the list of victims at the horse sacrifice in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_656> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 11, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 9, 13 (with the variant Kulaṅga);<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 27. 32.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 83.</ref>

कुल्मल
<u>'''Kulmala'''</u> seems, in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_657> iv. 6, 5;<br> v. 18, 15.</ref> the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve1_657> iii. 8, 1. 2.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_657> iii. 4, 4, 14.</ref> to denote the neck of an arrow in which the shaft is fixed.

कुमल-बर्हिस्
<u>'''Kumala-barhis'''</u> is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xv. 3, 21) as the seer of a Sāman or Chant.<br>==Foot Notes==

कुमार हारित
<u>'''Kumāra Hārita'''</u> is mentioned in the first [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_659> ii. 5, 22 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 3, [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> as a pupil of '''[[गालव|Gālava]].'''

कुल्माष
<u>'''Kulmāṣa,'''</u> a word mentioned by the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_660> i. 10, 2. 7.</ref> in the plural, is interpreted by the commentator as ‘bad beans’ (''kutsitā māṣāḥ''), a version adopted by Bo7htlingk in his  Dictionary.<ref name=fx2_ve1_660> ''Cf.'' Bhāgavata [[पुराण|Purāṇa]], v. 9. 12. where it is glossed ‘worm-eaten beans.’</ref> Little<ref name=fx3_ve1_660> ''Grammatical Index,'' 52.</ref> renders it ‘sour gruel’ in accordance with the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_660> i. 4.</ref>

कुल्या
<u>'''Kulyā'''</u> in two passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_661> iii. 45, 3;<br> x. 43, 7.</ref> according to Muir,<ref name=fx2_ve1_661> ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 465, 466.</ref> possibly refers to artificial watercourses flowing into a reservoir (''[[ह्रद|hrada]]''). See '''[[अवत|Avata]].'''

कुवय
<u>'''Kuvaya.'''</u> See '''Kvayi.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कुवल
<u>'''Kuvala'''</u> is a name of the jujube fruit (''Zizyphus jujuba'') occurring frequently in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_663> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 22, 89;<br> xxi. 29;<br> Kāthaka Saṃhitā, xii. 10.</ref> and Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve1_663> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 4, 10;<br> xii. 7, 1, 2;<br> 2, 9;<br> 9, 1, 5, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 242.</ref> in connexion with '''[[कर्कन्धु|Karkandhu]]''' and '''[[बदर|Badara]].''' See also '''Kola.'''

कुश
<u>'''Kuśa,'''</u> a word later denoting the ‘sacred grass’ (''Poa cynosuroides''), is taken by the St. Petersburg Dictionary to mean simply ‘grass’ in the passages of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] in which it occurs.<br><br>^1) ii. 5, 2, 15; iii. 1, 2, 16; v. 3, 2, 7, etc. Kuśā and Kuśī occur in Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 7; Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 6, 2, 9; [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 10, 1. 2, 7, apparently denoting pins of wood or metal, used as a mark in a special mode of recitation.<br>==Foot Notes==

कु-सर
<u>'''Ku-sara'''</u> is mentioned with '''[[शर|Śara]]''' and other grasses in one hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_665> i. 191, 3. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 72.</ref> as affording lurking places for serpents.

कुशिक
<u>'''Kuśika'''</u> is the probably mythical forefather<ref name=fx1_ve1_666> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 25.</ref> of the Kuśikas, and especially the father of the most important member of that family, '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_666> Rv. iii. 33, 5.</ref> The Kuśikas are repeatedly referred  to in the third Maṇḍala of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx3_ve1_666> iii. 26, 1;<br> 29, 15;<br> 30, 20;<br> 33, 5;<br> 42, 9;<br> 50, 4;<br> 53, 9. 10.</ref> and figure in the legend of [[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]] in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_666> vii. 18;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 27.</ref> They were clearly a family of priests who attached themselves to the service of the princes of the '''Bharatas.''' They were especially devoted to the worship of Indra; hence he is styled [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] even in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx5_ve1_666> i. 10, 11, with Sāyaṇa's note. ''Cf.'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 7;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 4, 19;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 12, 4;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 62, 63. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' i, 38;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 342 ''et seq.;<br>'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 101, 121;<br> Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 155;<br> Oldenberg. ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 209.</ref>

कुश्रि वाज-श्रवस
<u>'''Kuśri [[वाज|Vāja]]-śravasa'''</u> appears as a teacher concerned with the lore of the sacred fire in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_667> x. 5, 5. 1.</ref> and in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_667> vi. 4, 33 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 5, 3, [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> he is mentioned as a pupil of '''[[वाजश्रवस्|Vājaśravas]].''' It is not clear whether he is identical with the Kuśri of the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka<ref name=fx3_ve1_667> vi. 5, 4 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]] only).</ref> in the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension, and of the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] in the tenth book of the Śatapatha,<ref name=fx4_ve1_667> x. 6, 5, 9. In the Vaṃśas the name is accented Kúśri, but in x. 5, 5, 1, as Kuśrī;<br> no stress can, however, be laid on this. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 70;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xxxiii.</ref> who is mentioned as a pupil of '''[[यज्ञवचस् राजस्तम्बायन|Yajñavacas Rājastambāyana]].'''

कु-षण्ड
<u>'''Ku-ṣaṇḍa'''</u> is mentioned with '''[[षण्ड|Ṣaṇḍa]]''' as a priest at the snake festival described in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_668> xxv. 15, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 34;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śranta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 20, 10.</ref>

कुषीतक
<u>'''1. Kuṣītaka'''</u> denotes, according to the commentary on the one passage of the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_669> v. 5, 13. 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 72.</ref> in which it is found, the sea crow (''[[सम्उद्र|samudra]]-kāka'')

कुषीतक साम-श्रवस
<u>'''2. Kuṣītaka Sāma-śravasa'''</u> is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_670> xvii. 4. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 34.</ref> as the Gṛhapati, or householder at a sacrificial session, of the Kauṣītakis. 

कुषुम्भक
<u>'''Kuṣumbhaka'''</u> seems in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_671> i. 191, 16. The sense of ‘poisonbag’ is possible in i. 191, 15, and is accepted there by Bo7htlingk in his Dictionary.</ref> to mean a poisonous insect, Kuṣumbha in th Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_671> ii. 32, 6. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 99;<br> Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 257.</ref> clearly having the sense of a poison bag. Sāyaṇa renders it as ‘ichneumon’ (''[[नकुल|nakula]]'').

कुष्ठ
<u>'''1. Kuṣṭha'''</u> is the name of a plant (''Costus speciosus'' or ''arabicus'')<ref name=fx1_ve1_672> Or ''Saussurea auriculata,'' Hillebreandt. ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 65.</ref> which is prominent in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_672> v. 4;<br> vi. 102;<br> xix. 139.</ref> It grew especially on the mountains, along with the Soma, on the high peaks of the Himālaya (''[[हिमवन्त्|Himavant]]'') where the eagles nest, and was thence brought east to men.<ref name=fx3_ve1_672> v. 4, 1. 2. 8;<br> xix. 39, 1.</ref> Like Soma, it is said to have grown in the third heaven under the famous '''[[अश्वत्थ|Aśvattha]]''' tree, where the gods were wont to assemble, and thence it was brought in a golden ship.<ref name=fx4_ve1_672> v. 4, 3-6;<br> vi. 75, 1. 2;<br> xix. 39, 6-8.</ref> As a remedy, it held the highest place among herbs, being called by the auspicious names [[नघ-मार|Nagha-māra]] and Naghā-riṣa, and styled the offspring of Jīvala and Jīvalā, the ‘lively’ ones.<ref name=fx5_ve1_672> v. 4, 1;<br> xix. 39, 4.</ref> It cured headache (''[[शीर्षामय|śīrṣāmaya]]''), diseases of the eyes, bodily affliction,<ref name=fx6_ve1_672> v. 4, 10.</ref> but especially fever--hence called ‘feverdestroyer’ (''takma-nāśana'')--and consumption ('''[[यक्ष्म|Yakṣma]]'''). From its general properties it was also named ‘all-healing’ (''viśvabheṣaja'').<ref name=fx7_ve1_672> xix. 39, 9.</ref> Its aromatic qualities were apparently known, as it is classed with ‘salve’ ('''[[आञ्जन|Āñjana]]''') and ‘nard’ ('''[[नलद|Nalada]]''').<ref name=fx8_ve1_672> vi. 102, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Grohmann, ''Indische, Studien,'' 9, 420 ''et seq.;<br>'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 63, 64;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 415, 680;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 227, 228.</ref>

कुष्ठ
<u>'''2. Kuṣṭha.'''</u>--In one passage of the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_673> iii. 7, 7. ''Cf.'' Bōhtlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> there is a series of fractions, '''[[कला|Kalā]], [[कुष्ठ|Kuṣṭha]], [[शफ|Śapha]], Pad,''' which appear to denote one-sixteenth, one-twelfth, one-eighth, and one-fourth respectively. 

कुसीदिन्
<u>'''Kusīdin'''</u> is a designation of the ‘usurer’ found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_674> xiii. 4, 3, 11.</ref> and the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_674> vi. 32.</ref> and often in the Sūtras. Jolly,<ref name=fx3_ve1_674> ''Recht und Sitle,'' 98, 99.</ref> referring doubtless to the expression ''kusīda apratītta,''<ref name=fx4_ve1_674> iii. 3, 8, 1. 2.</ref> ‘a loan not yet repaid,’ occurring in connexion with ''an-[[ऋण|ṛṇa]],'' ‘free from debt,’ appears to be right in taking Kusīda to have the sense of ‘loan’ in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā. The rate of interest on loans is not specified before the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] period.<ref name=fx5_ve1_674> ''E.g.,'' [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 29 ''et seq. Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 259.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[ऋण|Ṛṇa]].'''

कुसुरुबिन्द औद्दलकि
<u>'''Kusurubinda Auddalaki'''</u> appears as an authority on ritual matters in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_675> xxii. 15, 1. 10.</ref> the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve1_675> vii. 2, 2, 1.</ref> the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_675> i. 75 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 23, 327), where the reading seems to be Asurbinda.</ref> and the Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_675> i. 16. See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 39. The name is there read as Kusurubindu;<br> in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 22, 14 it is Kusurabindu.</ref> He may have been the brother of '''[[श्वेतकेतु|Śvetaketu]],''' as suggested by Weber.<ref name=fx5_ve1_675> ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 61, n.</ref>

कुहू
<u>'''Kuhū.'''</u> See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कूचक्र
<u>'''Kūcakra'''</u> is a word occurring only once in an obscure verse of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_677> x. 102, 11.</ref> where Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve1_677> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 157. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 14.</ref> suggests that it has the sense of the wheel by which water is raised from a well. Much more probable is the interpretation of Roth,<ref name=fx3_ve1_677> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> who understands it to mean the female breast.

कूट
<u>'''Kūṭa,'''</u> a word found in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_678> x. 102, 4.</ref> the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_678> viii. 8, 16.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx3_ve1_678> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 24;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 1, 15;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 49, 9;<br> 50, 2 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 114).</ref> is of doubtful signification. On the whole,  the most probable sense is hammer,<ref name=fx4_ve1_678> So Bloomfield, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 546;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 585.</ref> which suits every passage adequately. The St. Petersburg Dictionary renders it ‘horn,’ which is the sense accepted by Whitney<ref name=fx5_ve1_678> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 505.</ref> for the Atharvaveda passage where it occurs. Geldner<ref name=fx6_ve1_678> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 138;<br> 2, 7. ''Cf.'' von Bradke, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 46, 458;<br> Kuhn's ''Zeitschrift,'' 34, 156;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 222.</ref> thinks that it means ‘trap.’

कूदी
<u>'''Kūdī,'''</u> written also Kūṭī in the manuscripts, occurs in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_679> v. 19, 12.</ref> and the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_679> Bloomfield's edition, xliv. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 11, 355;<br> 12, 416;<br> Roth, ''Festgrnss an Bo7htlingk,'' 98;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 254;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 165.</ref> denoting a twig--identified by the scholiast with '''Badarī,''' the jujube--which was tied to the bodies of the dead to efface their traces, presumably in order to render the return of the spirit to the old home difficult.

कूप
<u>'''Kūpa'''</u> occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_680> i. 105, 17.</ref> and later literature<ref name=fx2_ve1_680> Av. v. 31, 8;<br> Satapatha Brahmaṇa, iii. 5, 4, 1;<br> iv. 4, 5, 3;<br> vi. 3, 3. 26, etc.;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 184. etc. The adjective ''kūpya,'' ‘being in a hole,’ occurs frequently in the later Saṃhitās.</ref> denoting an artificial hollow in the earth, or pit. In some cases they must have been deep, as [[त्रित|Trita]] in the myth is said to have fallen into one from which he could not escape unaided.<ref name=fx3_ve1_680> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 67.</ref>

कूबर
<u>'''Kūbara'''</u> in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (ii. 1, 11) and '''Kūbarī''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iv. 6, 9, 11. 12) and the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xxvii. 6) denote the pole of a cart.<br>==Foot Notes==

कूर्च
<u>'''Kūrca'''</u> is found in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_682> vii. 5, 8, 5.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_682> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 3, 4. 7;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 11, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, v, 1, 4.</ref> denoting a bundle of grass used as a seat. In one passage of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_682> xiii. 4, 3, 1.</ref> a golden [[कूर्च|Kūrca]] is referred to. 

कूर्म
<u>'''Kūrma,'''</u> the ‘tortoise,’ is mentioned frequently in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_683> Av. ix. 4, 16;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 3, 3;<br> v. 2, 8, 4. 5;<br> 7, 13, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 15, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 34, etc.</ref> and Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx2_ve1_683> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 2, 3;<br> vi. 1, 1, 12, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 95;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 153.</ref> but nothing is said of its characteristics. See also '''[[कश्यप|Kaśyapa]].'''

कूशाम्ब स्वायव लातव्य
<u>'''Kūśāmba [[स्वायव|Svāyava]] Lātavya'''</u> is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_684> viii. 6, 8.</ref> as a priest. His name apparently means<ref name=fx2_ve1_684> The form is peculiar, as Kuśāmba would be expected.</ref> Kūśāmba,<ref name=fx3_ve1_684> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 55, n. 2.</ref> of the [[लातव्य|Lātavya]] clan, son of Svāyu.

कृकलास
<u>'''Kṛkalāsa'''</u> denotes the ‘chameleon’ mentioned in the list of sacrificial victims at the horse sacrifice in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_685> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 19, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 21;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 40.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_685> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 5, 22.</ref> The female chameleon, Kṛkalāsī, is also referred to in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx3_ve1_685> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 221 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 29), Sāṭyāyanaka in Sāyaṇa on Rv. viii. 91.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 95.</ref> See '''[[गोधा|Godhā]]''' and '''[[शयण्डक|Śayaṇḍaka]].'''

कृक-वाकु
<u>'''Kṛka-vāku,'''</u> the ‘cock,’ being named in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_686> v. 31, 2. ''Cf.'' x. 136, 10.</ref> with sheep, goats, and other domesticated animals, was presumably tamed.<ref name=fx2_ve1_686> ''Cf.,'' however, Sāyaṇa on [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 18, 1, who says that it is a ‘forest’ [[कुक्कुट|Kukkuṭa]].</ref> In the list of victims at the horse sacrifice in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_686> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 15;<br> Vājasaneyi;<br> Saṃhitā, xxiv. 35.</ref> it appears as dedicated to Savitṛ: [[यास्क|Yāska]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_686> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], xii. 3.</ref> explains this by the fact that it declares the time of day (''kālānuvāda''). The commentator Mahīdhara<ref name=fx5_ve1_686> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> explains the name by ''tāmra-cūḍa,'' ‘red-crested.’ It is of course onomatopoetic (‘calling kṛka’).<ref name=fx6_ve1_686> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 251;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18. 285.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 91.</ref> See also '''[[कुक्कुट|Kukkuṭa]].''' 

कृत
<u>'''Kṛta.'''</u> See 2. '''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]]''' and 2. '''Yuga.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कृति
<u>'''Kṛti.'''</u>--From one passage in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_688> i. 168, 3.</ref> where the Maruts are described as having Kṛtis, Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve1_688> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 301. ''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 221.</ref> concludes that the word means a dagger used in war. But there is no evidence that [[कृति|Kṛti]] was ever a human weapon. See '''Asi.'''

कृत्तिकास्
<u>'''Kṛttikās.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कृत्वन्
<u>'''Kṛtvan.'''</u>--In one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_690> ix. 65, 23.</ref> the word [[कृत्वन्|Kṛtvan]] in the plural is mentioned with the '''Ārjīkas''' and the five peoples. Pischel<ref name=fx2_ve1_690> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 209.</ref> thinks that it means a people, and Sāyaṇa expressly says that the Kṛtvans designate a country.<ref name=fx3_ve1_690> ''Kṛtvāna iti deśābhidhānam.''</ref> The name in that case would point to some connexion with the '''Kurus''' or '''Krivis.''' Hillebrandt,<ref name=fx4_ve1_690> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 136, 137</ref> however, thinks that the word is an adjective which qualifies Ārjīkas and designates this people as magicians, being applied to them by an opponent. In favour of this view, he quotes Hiouen Thsang's statement<ref name=fx5_ve1_690> Cunningham, ''Aneient Gevgraphy of India,'' 93.<br><br>''Cf.'' Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> that the neighbouring kings held the base Kaśmīrians in such scorn as to refuse all alliance with them, and to give them the name of Ki-li-to, or Kṛtyas. He suggests that the Ārjīkas settled in Kasmīr in ancient times already had the same evil reputation as their successors in later days.

कृप
<u>'''Kṛpa'''</u> is mentioned in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_691> viii. 3, 12;<br> 4, 2. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 163.</ref> along with [[रुशम|Ruśama]] and '''[[श्यावक|Śyāvaka]],''' as a protégé of Indra.

कृमि
<u>'''Kṛmi,'''</u> ‘worm.’ In the later Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve1_692> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 11, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 11;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 30;<br> [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iv. 36;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 1, 2;<br> and ''of.'' Rv. i. 191.</ref> and especially in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_692> ii. 31. 32;<br> v. 23.</ref> worms play a considerable part. They are  regarded as poisonous, and are spoken of as found in the mountains, in forests, in waters, in plants, and in the human body. In accordance with widespread primitive ideas, they are considered to be the causes of disease in men and animals. The Atharvaveda contains three hymns<ref name=fx2_ve1_692/> as charms directed against them. The first of these hymns is of a general character, the second is meant to destroy worms in cattle, and the third is intended to cure children of worms. When found in men, worms are said to have their place in the head and ribs,<ref name=fx3_ve1_692> Av. ii. 31, 4.</ref> and to creep into the eyes, nose, and teeth.<ref name=fx4_ve1_692> Av. v. 23, 3.</ref> They are described as dark brown, but white in the fore part of the body, with black ears, and as having three heads.<ref name=fx5_ve1_692> Av. v. 23, 4 ''et seq.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98, 393;<br> Kuhn, ''Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprachforschung,'' 13, 49 ''et seq.;<br>'' 113 ''et seq.;<br>'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 313 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 199;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 73.</ref> They are given many specific names: '''[[अलाण्डु|Alāṇḍu]], [[एजत्क|Ejatka]], [[कष्कष|Kaṣkaṣa]], [[कीट|Kīṭa]], [[कुरूरु|Kurūru]], [[नीलङ्गु|Nīlaṅgu]], [[येवाष|Yevāṣa]], [[वघा|Vaghā]], [[वृक्षसर्पी|Vṛkṣasarpī]], [[शलुन|Śaluna]], [[शवर्त|Śavarta]], [[शिपवित्नुक|Śipavitnuka]], [[स्तेग|Stega]].'''

कृमुक
<u>'''Kṛmuka'''</u> is the name in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_693> xix. 10.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_693> vi. 6, 2, 11.</ref> of a species of wood used for fuel.<ref name=fx3_ve1_693> ''Ibid.'' (''Krāmuha'' as applied to ''[[सम्इध्|samidh]]'').</ref>

कृश
<u>'''Kṛśa'''</u> is mentioned with '''[[संवर्त|Saṃvarta]]''' as a pious sacrificer to Indra in one of the [[वालखिल्य|Vālakhilya]] hymns of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_694> viii. 54, 2.</ref> and in another<ref name=fx2_ve1_694> viii. 59, 3.</ref> as a speaker of truth, while a third is traditionally<ref name=fx3_ve1_694> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 293, n.</ref> ascribed to his authorship. He seems also to be mentioned with '''[[शयु|Śayu]]''' as a protégé of the Aśvins in another hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx4_ve1_694> x. 40, 8.</ref> but here the word may merely denote the ‘feeble man.’<ref name=fx5_ve1_694> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 132, 164.</ref> 

कृशन
<u>'''Kṛśana,'''</u> ‘pearl.’ In the Rigveda pearls are mentioned as adorning the car of Savitṛ<ref name=fx1_ve1_695> i. 35, 4.</ref> as well as being used for the adornment of a horse.<ref name=fx2_ve1_695> x. 68, 1.</ref> Hence the horse is spoken of as the ‘pearled one’ (''kṛśanāvant'').<ref name=fx3_ve1_695> i. 126, 4. ''Cf. kṛśanin,'' vii. 18, 23.</ref> The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_695> x. 1, 7.</ref> also refers to pearls, and mentions that ‘pearl shell’ (''śañkhaḥ kṛśanaḥ'') won from the sea was used as an amulet.<ref name=fx5_ve1_695> iv. 10, 1. 3.</ref> The Nighaṇṭu<ref name=fx6_ve1_695> i. 2. ''Cf.'' Sāma [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], 1, 6, 22.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'', 53, 54;<br> Lanman in Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 161.</ref> renders the word as ‘gold.’

कृशानु
<u>'''Kṛśānu'''</u> appears in the Rigveda as a mythological personage.<ref name=fx1_ve1_696> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 74, 112, 137;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 448.</ref> In one verse,<ref name=fx2_ve1_696> i. 112, 21.</ref> however, Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_696> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' 4.</ref> sees in this word the name of a bowman, but there seems no reason to dissociate this passage from the rest.

कृषि
<u>'''Kṛṣi,'''</u> ‘ploughing.’ The cultivation of the soil was no doubt known to the Indians before they separated from the Iranians, as is indicated by the identity of the expressions ''yavaṃ kṛṣ'' and ''[[सस्य|sasya]]'' in the Rigveda with ''yao karesh'' and ''hahya'' in the Avesta, referring to the ploughing in of the seed and to the grain which resulted.<ref name=fx1_ve1_697> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 235;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 85.</ref> But it is not without significance that the expressions for ploughing occur mainly in the first<ref name=fx2_ve1_697> Forms of the root ''kṛṣ,'' ‘to plough,’ occur in Rv. i. 23, 15;<br> 176, 2.</ref> and tenth<ref name=fx3_ve1_697> Rv. x. 34, 13;<br> 117, 7. In x. 146, 6, ''akṛṣīvala,'' ‘not agricultural,’ occurs. ''Cf.'' x. 101, 4.</ref> books of the Rigveda, and only rarely in the so-called ‘family’ books (ii.-vii.).<ref name=fx4_ve1_697> ''Kṛṣ'' is also found in viii. 20, 19;<br> 22, 6;<br> in the family books only in iv. 57, 4, and as ''vi-kṛṣ'' in iv. 57, 8.</ref> In the Atharvaveda '''Pṛthī [[वैन्य|Vainya]]''' is credited with the origination of ploughing,<ref name=fx5_ve1_697> viii. 10, 24.</ref> and even in the Rigveda the Aśvins are spoken of as concerned with the sowing of grain by means of the plough.<ref name=fx6_ve1_697> i. 117, 21.</ref> In the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas ploughing is repeatedly referred to.<ref name=fx7_ve1_697> ''[[कृषि|Kṛṣi]]'' is found, ''e.g.,'' in Av. ii. 4, 5;<br> viii. 2, 19;<br> 10, 24;<br> x. 6, 12;<br> xii. 2, 27, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 11;<br> 1, etc.;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 2, 2;<br> iii. 6, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iv. 10;<br> ix. 27;<br> xiv. 19. 21, etc.;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 2, 2, 7;<br> viii. 6, 2, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 2, 5, etc. In Av. vi. 116, 1, ''kārṣīvaṇa'' denotes a ‘plougher.’ See also [[कार्ष्मन्|Kārṣman]].</ref> <br><br>Even in the Rigveda<ref name=fx8_ve1_697> x. 34, 13;<br> 117, 7. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''India, Old and New,'' 208.</ref> there is clear proof of the importance attached to agriculture. In the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx9_ve1_697> xvii. 1.</ref> the '''Vrātyas,''' Hindus without the pale of Brahminism, are described as not cultivating the soil.<br><br>The plough land was called '''[[उर्वरा|Urvarā]]''' or '''[[क्षेत्र|Kṣetra]];''' manure ('''[[शकन्|Śakan]], [[करीष|Karīṣa]]''') was used, and irrigation was practised ('''[[खनित्र|Khanitra]]'''). The plough ('''[[लाङ्गल|Lāṅgala]], [[सीर|Sīra]]''') was drawn by oxen, teams of six, eight, or even twelve being employed.<ref name=fx10_ve1_697> Av. vi. 91, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 2. ''Cf.'' Rv. viii. 6, 48;<br> x. 101, 4.</ref> The operations of agriculture are neatly summed up in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx11_ve1_697> i. 6, 1, 3.</ref> as ‘ploughing, sowing, reaping, and threshing’ (''kṛṣantaḥ, vapantaḥ, lunantaḥ, mṛṇantaḥ''). The ripe grain was cut with a sickle ('''[[दात्र|Dātra]], Sṛṇi'''), bound into bundles<ref name=fx12_ve1_697> viii. 78, 10;<br> x. 101, 3;<br> 131, 2.</ref> ('''[[पर्ष|Parṣa]]'''), and beaten out on the floor of the granary ('''[[खल|Khala]]''').<ref name=fx13_ve1_697> Rv. x. 48, 7.</ref> The grain was then separated from the straw and refuse either by a sieve ('''Titau''') or a winnowing fan ('''[[शूर्प|Śūrpa]]''').<ref name=fx14_ve1_697> Rv. x. 71, 2;<br> Av. xii. 3, 19. The technical terms are ''tuṣair vi-vic,'' Av. xi. 1, 12;<br> ''palāvān apa-vic,'' xii. 3, 19.</ref> The winnower was called '''Dhānyākṛt,'''<ref name=fx15_ve1_697> Rv. x. 94, 13.</ref> and the grain was measured in a vessel called '''Urdara.'''<ref name=fx16_ve1_697> Rv. ii. 14, 11. See also '''[[स्थिवि|Sthivi]].'''</ref><br><br>The Rigveda leaves us in doubt as to the kind of grain grown, for '''Yava''' is a word of doubtful signification, and '''[[धाना|Dhānā]]''' is also vague. In the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx17_ve1_697> See Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 12, for a list.</ref> things are different. Rice ('''[[व्रीहि|Vrīhi]]''') appears, Yava means barley, with a species styled '''[[उपवाक|Upavāka]].''' Beans ('''[[मुद्ग|Mudga]], [[माष|Māṣa]]'''), sesamum ('''Tila'''), and other grains ('''[[अणु|Aṇu]], [[खल्व|Khalva]], [[गोधूम|Godhūma]], [[नीवार|Nīvāra]], [[प्रियङ्गु|Priyaṅgu]], [[मसूर|Masūra]], [[श्यामाक|Śyāmāka]]''') are mentioned, while cucumbers ('''[[उर्वारू|Urvārū]], Uryārūka''') were known. It is uncertain whether fruit trees ('''[[वृक्ष|Vṛkṣa]]''') were cultivated, or merely grew wild;<ref name=fx18_ve1_697> The pulling of ripe fruit is referred to in Rv. iii. 45, 4. ''Cf. pakvā [[शाखा|śākhā]],'' Rv. i. 8, 8;<br> ''[[वृक्ष|vṛkṣa]] [[पक्व|pakva]],'' Rv. iv. 20, 5;<br> Av. xx. 127, 4. But that does not prove arboriculture.</ref> but frequent mention is made of the jujube ('''[[कर्कन्धु|Karkandhu]], [[कुवल|Kuvala]], [[बदर|Badara]].''').<br><br>The seasons for agriculture are briefly summed up in a passage of the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā:<ref name=fx19_ve1_697> vii. 2, 10, 2.</ref> barley ripened in summer, being no doubt sown, as in modern India, in winter; rice  ripened in autumn, being sown in the beginning of the rains; beans and sesamum, planted at the time of the summer rains, ripened in the winter and the cool season. There were two harvests ('''[[सस्य|Sasya]]''') a year according to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā;<ref name=fx20_ve1_697> v. 1, 7, 3.</ref> the winter crop was ripe by the month of [[चैत्र|Caitra]] (March-April) according to the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx21_ve1_697> xix. 3. ''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 81, n. 1.</ref><br><br>The farmer had plenty of trouble of his own: moles destroyed the seed, birds and various kinds of reptiles ('''[[उपक्वस|Upakvasa]], [[जभ्य|Jabhya]], [[तर्द|Tarda]], [[पतङ्ग|Pataṅga]]''') injured the young shoots, excessive rain or drought might damage the crops. The Atharvaveda contains spells to prevent these evils.<ref name=fx22_ve1_697> See Av. vi. 50. 142;<br> vii. 11.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 235243.</ref>

कृष्टि
<u>'''Kṛṣṭi'''</u> denotes ‘people’ in general from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_698> i. 52, 11;<br> 100, 10;<br> 160, 5;<br> 189, 3;<br> iii. 49, 1;<br> iv. 21, 2, etc.;<br> Av. xii. 1, 3. 4.</ref> onwards. Its common and regular use in this sense appears to show that the Āryans, when they invaded India, were already agriculturists, though the employment of the words referring to ploughing mentioned under '''[[कृषि|Kṛṣi]]''' indicates that not all of the people devoted themselves equally to that occupation. Indra and Agni are ''par excellence'' the lords of men ([[कृष्टि|Kṛṣṭi]]).<ref name=fx2_ve1_698> i. 177, 1;<br> iv. 17, 5;<br> vii. 26, 5;<br> viii. 13, 9 (Indra);<br> i. 59, 5;<br> vi. 18, 2;<br> vii. 5, 5 (Agni).</ref> Sometimes the word is further defined by the addition of an adjective meaning ‘belonging to mankind,’ ‘of men’ (''mānuṣīḥ,''<ref name=fx3_ve1_698> Rv. i. 59, 5;<br> vi. 18, 2.</ref> ''mānavīḥ'').<ref name=fx4_ve1_698> Av. iii. 24, 3.</ref><br><br>Special mention is frequently<ref name=fx5_ve1_698> Rv. ii. 2, 10;<br> iii. 53, 16;<br> iv. 38, 10;<br> x. 60, 4;<br> 119, 6;<br> 178, 3;<br> Av. iii. 24, 2;<br> xii. 1, 42.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 141.</ref> made of the ‘five peoples’ (''pañca kṛṣṭayaḥ''). The exact sense of this expression is doubtful. See '''Panca Janāsaḥ.'''

कृष्ण
<u>'''1. Kṛṣṇa'''</u> (‘black’) denotes a dark-coloured animal or bird. In some passages,<ref name=fx1_ve1_699> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 6, 5;<br> vi. 1, 3, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 4, 1;<br> iii. 2, 1, 28. So ''[[कृष्ण|kṛṣṇa]]-[[विषाणा|viṣāṇā]],'' ‘horn of the black antelope,’ ''ibid.,'' iii. 2, 1, 18, 28;<br> 2, 20;<br> iv. 4, 5, 2;<br> v. 4, 2, 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 3, 7. See also the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] passages, Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 17;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 36 (''cf.'' ii. 1).</ref> as the context shows, an antelope is certainly  meant. In a few others<ref name=fx2_ve1_699> Rv. x. 94, 5;<br> Av. xi. 2, 2;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 27.</ref> a bird of prey seems indicated. See also '''[[कृष्णाजिन|Kṛṣṇājina]].'''

कृष्ण
<u>'''2. Kṛṣṇa'''</u> appears as the name of a seer in one hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_700> viii. 85, 3. 4.</ref> Tradition assigns to him or to [[विश्वक|Viśvaka]], son of [[कृष्ण|Kṛṣṇa]] (''Kārṣṇi''), the authorship of the following hymn.<ref name=fx2_ve1_700> viii. 86.</ref> The word Kṛṣṇiya may be a patronymic<ref name=fx3_ve1_700> i. 116, 23;<br> 117, 7.</ref> formed from the same name in two other hymns of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx4_ve1_700> As a patronymic, it would be an isolated formation (''cf.'' however ''[[पज्रिय|Pajriya]]''), instead of ''Kārṣṇya. Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' 228''a'' and 200.</ref> where the Aśvins are said to have restored '''Viṣṇāpū''' to [[विश्वक|Viśvaka]] Kṛṣṇya. In that case [[कृष्ण|Kṛṣṇa]] would seem to be the grandfather of Viṣṇāpū. This [[कृष्ण|Kṛṣṇa]] may be identical with [[कृष्ण|Kṛṣṇa]] [[आङ्गिरस|Āṅgirasa]] mentioned in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx5_ve1_700> xxx. 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 108;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedia Mythology,'' p. 52.</ref>

कृष्ण देवकी-पुत्र
<u>'''3. Kṛṣṇa Devakī-putra'''</u> is mentioned in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_701> iii. 17, 6.</ref> as a pupil of the mythical '''[[घोर आङ्गिरस|Ghora Āṅgirasa]].''' Tradition,<ref name=fx2_ve1_701> ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 169.</ref> and several modern writers like Grierson, Garbe, and von Schroeder, recognize in him the hero [[कृष्ण|Kṛṣṇa]], who later is deified. In their view he is a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] teacher of morals, as opposed to Brahminism.<ref name=fx3_ve1_701> Von Schroeder, ''Vienna Oriental Journal,'' 19, 414, 415;<br> Grierson, ''Encyclopadia of Religions,'' article ‘Bhakti’;<br> Garbe, ''Bhagavadgītā.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 71;<br> 148;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1905, 386.</ref> This is extremely doubtful. It appears better either to regard the coincidence of name as accidental, or to suppose that the reference is a piece of Euhemerism. To identify this [[कृष्ण|Kṛṣṇa]] with the preceding, as does the St. Petersburg Dictionary, seems to be quite groundless.

कृष्ण हारीत
<u>'''4. Kṛṣṇa Hārīta'''</u> is mentioned as a teacher in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx1_ve1_702> iii. 2. 6.</ref> The [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx2_ve1_702> viii. 10.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 391, n.;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 50.</ref> has Kṛtsna in the parallel passage. 

कृष्ण-दत्त लौहितय
<u>'''Kṛṣṇa-datta Lauhitaya'''</u> (‘descendant of Lohita’) is mentioned in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 42, 1) as a pupil of '''[[श्यामसुजयन्त लौहित्य|Śyāmasujayanta Lauhitya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कृष्ण-धृति सात्यकि
<u>'''Kṛṣṇa-dhṛti Sātyaki'''</u> (‘descendant of Satyaka’) is mentioned in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 42, 1) as a pupil of '''[[सत्यश्रवस्|Satyaśravas]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कृष्ण-रात लौहित्य
<u>'''Kṛṣṇa-rāta Lauhitya'''</u> (‘descendant of Lohita’) is mentioned in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 42, 1) as a pupil of '''Śyāmaiajayanta [[लौहित्य|Lauhitya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कृष्णल
<u>'''Kṛṣṇala'''</u> denotes the berry of the ''Abrus precatorius,'' used as a weight according to the later authorities, one [[माष|Māṣa]] (‘bean’) being equated to four Kṛṣṇalas.<ref name=fx1_ve1_706> Manu, viii. 134.</ref> In the sense of a weight it occurs in the Taittirīva<ref name=fx2_ve1_706> ii. 3, 2, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> and other Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx3_ve1_706> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 4 (''[[हिरण्य|hiraṇya]] [[कृष्णल|kṛṣṇala]]'').</ref> and later.<ref name=fx4_ve1_706> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 6, 7;<br> Anupada [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 6. In the later language it is also called ''raktikā'' or ''guñjā'' (being a smooth red berry with a black spot at one end).<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber's edition of the [[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]], 82 ''et seq.;<br> Indische Strcifen,'' 1, 102, 103.</ref>

कृष्णाजिन
<u>'''Kṛṣṇājina'''</u> is the skin (''[[अजिन|ajina]]'') of the black antelope ('''[[कृष्ण|Kṛṣṇa]].''') It is repeatedly referred to in the later Saṃhitās and Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve1_707> Av. ix. 6, 17;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 9, 2;<br> v. 4, 4, 4: Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 1, 22;<br> 4, 1;<br> 9, 2, 35, etc.</ref> with regard to its ritual use.

कृष्णायस
<u>'''Kṛṣṇāyasa'''</u> (‘black metal’), ‘iron,’ is referred to in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 1, 6). See also '''Ayas''' and '''[[कार्ष्णायस|Kārṣṇāyasa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कृसर
<u>'''Kṛsara,'''</u> a term denoting a mess of rice and sesamum, often mentioned in the Sūtras, occurs in the Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_709> v. 2. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Omina und Portenta,'' 315 ''et seq.''</ref>

केकय
<u>'''Kekaya'''</u> is the name of a tribe which in later days, and probably also in Vedic times, was settled in the north-west,  oetween the '''[[सिन्धु|Sindhu]]''' (Indus) and '''[[वितस्ता|Vitastā]].'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_710> Pargiter, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 317, 332.</ref> In the Vedic texts the Kekayas are mentioned indirectly only in the name of their prince '''[[अश्वपति|Aśvapati]] [[कैकेय|Kaikeya]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_710> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 6, 1, 2. ''et seq.;<br>'' Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 11, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Litenature,'' 120;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 126.</ref>

केतु
<u>'''1. Ketu'''</u> is a term which Weber<ref name=fx1_ve1_711> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 41. The ''aruṇāḥ ketavaḥ'' (Av. xi. 10, 1. 2. 7), referred to in this sense in the St. Petersburg Dictionary, are not so treated by Bo7htlingk in his Dictionary.</ref> understands in the sense of ‘meteor’ or ‘comet’ in the late Adbhuta [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].

केतु वाज्य
<u>'''2. Ketu Vājya'''</u> (‘descendant of Vāja’) is mentioned as a teacher in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_712> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref>

केवर्त
<u>'''Kevarta, Kaivarta'''</u> are two variant forms denoting ‘fisherman’ in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_713> xxx. 16, with Mahīdhara's note.</ref> and [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_713> iii. 4, 12, 1, with Sāyaṇa's note.</ref> lists of victims at the Puruṣamedha, or human sacrifice.

केश
<u>'''Keśa,'''</u> ‘hair of the head,’ is repeatedly mentioned in the later Saṃhitās and Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve1_714> Av. v. 19, 3;<br> vi. 136, 3, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 22;<br> xx. 5;<br> xxv. 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 2, 48, etc.</ref> The hair was a matter of great care to the Vedic Indian, and several hymns of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_714> vi. 136. 137. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 68;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 536, 537.</ref> are directed to securing its plentiful growth. Cutting or shaving (''vap'') the hair is often referred to.<ref name=fx3_ve1_714> Av. viii. 2, 17;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 3, 1, etc. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 425 ''et seq.''</ref> For a man to wear long hair was considered effeminate.<ref name=fx4_ve1_714> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, 2, 14. But ''cf.'' Vincent Smith, ''Indian Antiquary,'' 34, 203.</ref> As to modes of dressing the hair see '''[[ओपश|Opaśa]]''' and '''[[कपर्द|Kaparda]];''' as to the beard see '''[[श्मश्रु|Śmaśru]].'''

केशिन्
<u>'''1. Keśin'''</u> is the name of a people occurring in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_715> xi. 8, 4, 6. ''Cf.'' Pānini, vi. 4, 165;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 131, 134.</ref> where their king is mentioned as learning from '''Khaṇḍika''' the atonement for a bad omen at the sacrifice. 

केशिन् दार्भ्य
<u>'''2. Keśin Dārbhya'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_716> This is the form of the name in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, and the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]];<br> also later in the Bṛhaddevatā.</ref> or '''[[दाल्भ्य|Dālbhya]]'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_716> This is the form in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]. It also appears later in the Rigveda Anukramaṇī.</ref> (‘descendant of Darbha’) is a somewhat enigmatic figure. According to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_716> xi. 8, 4, 1 ''et seq.,'' as explained by Sāyaṇa.</ref> and the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] Brāhmana<ref name=fx4_ve1_716> iii. 29, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> he was a king, sister's son of '''Uccaiḥśravas,''' according to the latter authority. His people were the '''Pañcālas,''' of whom the Keśins must therefore have been a branch, and who are said to have been threefold (''tryanīka'').<ref name=fx5_ve1_716> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxx. 2 (Weber ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 471);<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.;<br>'' [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xx. 25.</ref> A story is told of his having a ritual dispute with '''[[षण्डिक|Ṣaṇḍika]]''' in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx6_ve1_716> i. 4, 12 (von Schroeder gives no variant reading;<br> but ''ṣ'' and ''kh'' are constantly confused in manuscripts).</ref> this appears in another form in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_716/> He was a contemporary of a fellow sage, '''[[केशिन् सात्यकामि|Keśin Sātyakāmi]],''' according to the Maitrāyaṇī<ref name=fx7_ve1_716> i. 6, 5.</ref> and [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]]<ref name=fx8_ve1_716> ii. 6, 2, 3.</ref> Saṃhitās. The [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx9_ve1_716> xiii. 10, 8.</ref> attributes to him a Sāman or chant, and the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx10_ve1_716> vii. 4.</ref> tells how he was taught by a golden bird.<br><br>In view of the fact that the early literature always refers to [[दार्भ्य|Dārbhya]] as a sage, it seems doubtful whether the commentator is right in thinking that the Śatapatha refers to a king and a people, when a sage alone may well be meant, while the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] is of no great authority. The latter work may have assumed that the reference in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx11_ve1_716> xxx. 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 193, 209;<br> 2, 308;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 58, 59;<br> Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 62, n. 2.</ref> to the [[केशिन्|Keśin]] people signifies kingship, but this is hardly necessary.

केशिन् सात्य-कामि
<u>'''3. Keśin Sātya-kāmi'''</u> (‘descendant of Satyakāma’) is mentioned as a teacher and contemporary of '''[[केशिन् दार्भ्य|Keśin Dārbhya]]''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] (ii. 6, 2, 3) and Maitrāyaṇī (i. 6, 5) Saṃhitās. <br>==Foot Notes==

केसर-प्राबन्धा
<u>'''Kesara-prābandhā.'''</u>--In the list of the crimes of the '''Vaitahavyas''' narrated in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_718> v. 18, 11.</ref> is the cooking of the last she-goat (''caramājām'') of [[केसरप्राबन्धा|Kesaraprābandhā]], who may presumably be deemed to have been a woman, ‘having braided hair.’<ref name=fx2_ve1_718> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 432, 433.</ref> Ludwig,<ref name=fx3_ve1_718> Translation of the Rigveda, 2, 447.</ref> followed by Whitney,<ref name=fx4_ve1_718> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 252.</ref> appears to amend the passage (''carama-jām'') as meaning ‘the last-born calf’ of [[केसरप्राबन्धा|Kesaraprābandhā]], a cow. But this interpretation does not suit the name so well.

कैकेय
<u>'''Kaikeya,'''</u> ‘king of the Kekayas,’ is an epithet of '''[[अश्वपति|Aśvapati]].'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_719> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 6, 1, 2;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 11, 4.</ref>

कैरात
<u>'''Kairāta'''</u> is the name of a snake in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_720> v. 13, 5. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 243</ref>--possibly, but not probably, the modern Karait.

कैरातिका
<u>'''Kairātikā,'''</u> a ‘maiden of the '''[[किरात|Kirāta]]''' people,’ is mentioned in the Atharvaveda (x. 4, 14) as digging up roots for medicinal use.<br>==Foot Notes==

कैरिशि
<u>'''Kairiśi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Kiriśa,’ is the patronymic of '''Sutvan''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 28).<br>==Foot Notes==

कैवर्त
<u>'''Kaivarta.'''</u> See '''[[केवर्त|Kevarta]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कैशिनी
<u>'''Kaiśinī.'''</u>--The ''Kaiśinyaḥ prajāḥ,'' ‘offspring or people<ref name=fx1_ve1_724> So Sāyaṇa.</ref> of [[केशिन्|Keśin]],’ are mentioned in an obscure passage of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_724> xi. 8, 4, 6.</ref> either as still existing at the date of the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_724> ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 134.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 208.</ref> or as extinct.

कैशोर्य
<u>'''Kaiśorya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Kaiśori,’ is the patronymic of '''[[काप्य|Kāpya]]''' in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_725> ii. 5, 22;<br> iv. 5, 28 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> 

कोक
<u>'''1. Koka,'''</u> a word occurring in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_726> vii. 104, 22 (''koka-yātu,'' a ghost in the shape of a cuckoo).</ref> and the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_726> v. 23, 4;<br> viii. 6, 2.</ref> seems to denote the ‘cuckoo.’ In all the three passages in which it is found, Sāyaṇa explains it as the '''[[चक्रवाक|Cakravāka]].''' Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_726> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 454;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 262;<br> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 49;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 92.</ref> renders it in the Atharvaveda passages as a certain destructive parasitic animal. ''Cf.'' '''[[अन्यवाप|Anyavāpa]].'''

कोक
<u>'''2. Koka'''</u> is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 5, 4, 17) as a son of the [[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]] king, '''[[सात्रासाह|Sātrāsāha]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कोकिल
<u>'''Kokila,'''</u> a very frequent word in the Epic and later, denoting the cuckoo, is only inferred for the Vedic period from its being the name of a [[राजपुत्र|Rājaputra]] in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Anukramaṇī.<ref name=fx1_ve1_728> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 460.</ref>

कोणेय
<u>'''Koṇeya, Kauṇeya.'''</u> See '''Rajana.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कोल
<u>'''Kola,'''</u> another form of '''[[कुवल|Kuvala]],''' the ''Zizyphus jujuba,'' is mentioned in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vii. 3, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

कोश
<u>'''1. Kośa'''</u> is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_731> i. 130, 2;<br> iii. 32, 15;<br> iv. 17, 6. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 156.</ref> for the ‘bucket’ used in drawing water by means of a rope from a well ('''[[अवत|Avata]]'''). In the ritual<ref name=fx2_ve1_731> Rv. ix. 75. 3;<br> Av. xviii. 4. 30, etc. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 183 ''et seq.''</ref> it denotes a large vessel to hold Soma, as opposed to '''[[कलश|Kalaśa]].'''

कोस
<u>'''2. Kosa'''</u> denotes the body of a chariot.<ref name=fx1_ve1_732> Rv. i. 87, 2;<br> x. 85, 7, etc.</ref> Presumably it was fastened to the axles, but it was probably not very secure, as the body of Pūṣan's chariot is said not to fall.<ref name=fx2_ve1_732> Rv. vi. 54, 3.</ref> The ropes<ref name=fx3_ve1_732> ''Gāvaḥ,'' Rv. viii. 48, 5.</ref> used to fasten the [[कोश|Kośa]] are perhaps referred to in the word ''akṣā-nah.''<ref name=fx4_ve1_732> See under 1. '''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]].'''</ref> By synecdoche this word also denotes the whole chariot.<ref name=fx5_ve1_732> Rv. viii. 20, 8;<br> 22, 9. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 246.</ref> See also '''[[वन्धुर|Vandhura]], [[रथ|Ratha]].''' 

कोश
<u>'''3. Kośa.'''</u>--The exact sense of this word in '''[[कोश|Kośa]]-kārī,''' the designation of a female victim at the Puruṣamedha, or human sacrifice,<ref name=fx1_ve1_733> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 14;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 10, 1.</ref> is uncertain. It may be ‘sheath.’

कोष
<u>'''Koṣa.'''</u>--The Koṣas appear as a priestly family in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], where one of them, '''[[सुश्रवस्|Suśravas]],''' is mentioned by name.<ref name=fx2_ve1_734> x. 5, 5, 1.</ref><br><br>^1 x. 5, 5, 8.

कोसल
<u>'''Kosala'''</u> is the name of a people not occurring in the earliest Vedic literature. In the story of the spread of Āryan culture told in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_735> i. 4, 1, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> the [[कोसल|Kosala]]-Videhas, as the offspring of '''[[विदेघ|Videgha]] [[माथव|Māthava]],''' appear as falling later than the Kuru-Pañcālas under the influence of Brahminism. The same passage gives the '''[[सदानीरा|Sadānīrā]]''' as the boundary of the two peoples--[[कोसल|Kosala]] and [[विदेह|Videha]]. Elsewhere<ref name=fx2_ve1_735> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 4. ''Cf.'' [[हिरण्य-नाभ|Hiraṇya-nābha]], a [[राजपुत्र|Rājaputra]], in [[प्रश्न|Praśna]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 2, and [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 9, 13, as a [[कौसल्य|Kausalya]], while ''ibid.,'' 11, Para is styled [[वैदेह|Vaideha]].</ref> the [[कौसल्य|Kausalya]], or [[कोसल|Kosala]] king, '''[[पर आट्णार|Para Āṭṇāra]] [[हैरण्यनाभ|Hairaṇyanābha]],''' is described as having performed the great [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or horse sacrifice. Connexion with '''[[काशि|Kāśi]]''' and '''[[विदेह|Videha]]''' appears also from a passage of the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_735> xvi. 29, 5.</ref> Weber<ref name=fx4_ve1_735> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 182, 441.</ref> points out that Āśvalāyana, who was very probably a descendant of '''[[अश्वल|Aśvala]],''' the [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] priest of [[विदेह|Videha]], is called a [[कोसल|Kosala]] in the [[प्रश्न|Praśna]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx5_ve1_735> vi. 1.</ref> The later distinction of North and South [[कोसल|Kosala]] is unknown to both Vedic and Buddhist literature.<ref name=fx6_ve1_735> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 393, n.<br><br>''Cf.'' von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 167;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xlii;<br> Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 39, 132 ''et seq.;<br>'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 213-215;<br> Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 25.</ref><br><br>[[कोसल|Kosala]] lay to the north-east of the Ganges, and corresponded roughly to the modern Oudh.

कौकूस्त
<u>'''Kaukūsta'''</u> is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_736> iv. 6, 1, 13.</ref> as a giver of a Daksiṇā, or gift to the priests officiating at a sacrifice. The [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension reads the name '''Kaükthasta.'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_736> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 426, n. 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 134.</ref> 

कौणेय
<u>'''Kauṇeya.'''</u> See '''Rajana.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कौण्ठ-रव्य
<u>'''Kauṇṭha-ravya'''</u> is mentioned as a teacher in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_738> iii. 2, 2.</ref> and [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyakas.<ref name=fx2_ve1_738> vii. 14;<br> viii. 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 249.</ref>

कौण्डिनी
<u>'''Kauṇḍinī.'''</u> See '''[[पाराशरीकौण्डिनीपुत्र|Pārāśarīkauṇḍinīputra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कौण्डिन्य
<u>'''Kauṇḍinya'''</u> is mentioned as a pupil of '''[[शाण्डिल्य|Śāṇḍilya]]''' in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_740> ii. 5, 20;<br> iv. 5, 26 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 1;<br> iv. 6, 1, [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> See also '''Vidarbhīkauṇḍinya,''' and the following.

कौण्डिन्यायन
<u>'''Kauṇḍinyāyana'''</u> is mentioned in the first [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_741> ii. 5, 20.</ref> as a pupil of [[कौण्डिन्य|Kauṇḍinya]], pupil of [[कौण्डिन्य|Kauṇḍinya]] and [[आग्निवेश्य|Āgniveśya]]; in the second<ref name=fx2_ve1_741> iv. 5, 26.</ref> as a pupil of the two Kauṇḍinyas, pupil of [[कौण्डिन्य|Kauṇḍinya]] and [[आग्निवेश्य|Āgniveśya]]. Neither [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] is of much value.<ref name=fx3_ve1_741> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xxxiv.</ref>

कौतस्त
<u>'''Kautasta,'''</u> a word occurring once in the dual, is apparently a patronymic of '''[[अरिम्एजय|Arimejaya]]''' and '''[[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]],''' two [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]] priests at the snake sacrifice described in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_742> xxv. 15, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 35.</ref>

कौत्स
<u>'''Kautsa'''</u> (‘descendant of Kutsa’) is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_743> x. 6, 5, 9;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 5, 4 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension only).</ref> as a pupil of '''[[माहित्थि|Māhitthi]].''' A [[कौत्स|Kautsa]] is also attacked in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_743> i. 15.</ref> as denying the value of the Vedas, and there is a strong ritual tradition of hostility to the Kautsas.<ref name=fx3_ve1_743> ''E.g.,'' Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 20, 12;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 285. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 77, 140.</ref> 

कौत्सी-पुत्र
<u>'''Kautsī-putra'''</u> (‘son of a female descendant of '''[[कुत्स|Kutsa]]'''’) is mentioned as a pupil of '''[[बौधीपुत्र|Baudhīputra]]''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] in the Mādhyaṃdina recension (vi. 4, 31).<br>==Foot Notes==

कौपयेय
<u>'''Kaupayeya'''</u> is the patronymic of '''Uccaiḥśravas.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कौम्भ्य
<u>'''Kaumbhya'''</u> (‘descendant of Kumbhya’) is the patronymic of '''[[बभ्रु|Babhru]]'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कौरम
<u>'''Kaurama.'''</u> See '''[[कौरव|Kaurava]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कौरयाण
<u>'''Kaurayāṇa'''</u> is apparently a patronymic of '''Pākasthāman''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_748> viii. 3, 21. ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 25.</ref> Hopkins<ref name=fx2_ve1_748> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 90, n. 2.</ref> suggests that Kaurāyaṇa may be meant.

कौरव
<u>'''Kaurava'''</u> is the reading of the text of the Khilas<ref name=fx1_ve1_749> v. 8, 1 (Scheftelowitz, ''Die Apokryphen des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 155).</ref> and of some manuscripts of the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_749> xii. 14, 1.</ref> for the [[कौरम|Kaurama]] of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx3_ve1_749> xx. 127, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 689.</ref> who appears in a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’) as a generous donor among the '''Ruśamas.'''

कौरव्य
<u>'''Kauravya'''</u> (‘belonging to the '''Kurus’'''). A man of the Kuru people, is described in the Atharvaveda as enjoying prosperity with his wife under the rule of King '''[[परिक्षित्|Parikṣit]].'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_750> xx. 127, 8;<br> [[खिल|Khila]], v. 10, 2;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 17, 2. ''Cf.'' a [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] in the Vaitāna [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxxiv. 9.</ref> Mention is also made of the [[कौरव्य|Kauravya]] king '''[[बल्हिक प्रातिपीय|Balhika Prātipīya]]''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_750> xii. 9, 3, 3.</ref> and in the later legend '''Ārṣṭiṣeṇa''' and '''Devāpi''' are alleged to have been Kauravyas.<ref name=fx3_ve1_750> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 10.</ref>

कौरव्यायणी-पुत्र
<u>'''Kauravyāyaṇī-putra'''</u> (‘son of a female descendant of '''Kuru'''’) is mentioned as a teacher in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (v. 1, 1). <br>==Foot Notes==

कौरु-पञ्चाल
<u>'''Kauru-pañcāla,'''</u> ‘belonging to the Kuru-Pañcālas,’ is an epithet of '''[[आरुणि|Āruṇi]]''' in the Śatapatha Brāhmana (xi. 4, 1, 2), and a practice of those tribes is designated by this word in the same work (i. 7, 2, 8).<br>==Foot Notes==

कौलकावती
<u>'''Kaulakāvatī'''</u> are two persons mentioned in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (ii. 1, 3) as having given advice, in the capacity of priests, to '''[[रथप्रोत दार्भ्य|Rathaprota Dārbhya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कौलाल
<u>'''Kaulāla'''</u> is a word denoting a hereditary potter (‘son of a ''[[कुलाल|kulāla]]'' or potter’) according to the commentator Mahīdhara on the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_754> xxx. 7.</ref> The other Samhitās<ref name=fx2_ve1_754> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 13, and ''cf.'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 27.</ref> have '''[[कुलाल|Kulāla]].'''

कौलितर
<u>'''Kaulitara'''</u> is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_755> iv. 30. 14.</ref> as a '''[[दास|Dāsa]].''' Apparently the name is an epithet of '''[[शम्बर|Śambara]],''' meaning ‘son of Kulitara’: this points to [[शम्बर|Śambara]] having been a terrestrial foe, and not a mere demon.<ref name=fx2_ve1_755> ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 273;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 64, 161.</ref>

कौलीक
<u>'''Kaulīka,'''</u> like '''[[कुलीका|Kulīkā]],''' is the name of some sort of bird in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or horse sacrifice, in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_756> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 24;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 5.</ref>

कौशाम्बेय
<u>'''Kauśāmbeya'''</u> is the patronymic (‘descendant of Kuśāmba’) of a teacher '''Proti''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_757> xii. 2, 2, 13;<br> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 24.</ref> according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary: a view supported by the fact that '''Kūśāmba''' actually occurs as the name of a man in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_757> viii. 6, 8. The name is also found later (in the Epic) in the form of Kuśāmba.</ref> It is, however, possible that the word means a ‘native of the town Kauśāmbī’ as understood by Harisvāmin in his commentary on the Śatapatha Brāhmana.<ref name=fx3_ve1_757> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 153, n. 5. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 193;<br> Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 3, 36;<br> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 397.</ref> 

कौशिक
<u>'''Kauśika'''</u> is an epithet of Indra as ‘connected with the Kuśikas,’ and also of '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]''' as ‘son of [[कुशिक|Kuśika]].’<ref name=fx1_ve1_758> In a late [[खिल|Khila]], Scheftelowitz, ''Die Apokryphen des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 104.</ref> A teacher named [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] is mentioned as a pupil of '''[[कौण्डिन्य|Kauṇḍinya]]''' in the first two Vaṃśias (lists of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_758> ii. 6, 1;<br> iv. 6, 1 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension).</ref>

कौशिकायनि
<u>'''Kauśikāyani'''</u> (‘descendant of Kauśika’) is mentioned as a teacher and a pupil of '''[[घृतकौशिक|Ghṛtakauśika]]''' in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_759> ii. 5, 21;<br> iv. 5, 27 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3, [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref>

कौशिकी-पुत्र
<u>'''Kauśikī-putra'''</u> (‘son of a female descendant of Kuśika’) is mentioned in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 5, 1) as a pupil of '''[[आलम्बीपुत्र|Ālambīputra]]''' and '''[[वैयाघ्रपदीपुत्र|Vaiyāghrapadīputra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कौश्रेय
<u>'''Kauśreya'''</u> (‘descendant of Kuśri’) is the patronymic of '''Somadakṣa''' in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā (xx. 8; xxi. 9).<br>==Foot Notes==

कौषारव
<u>'''Kauṣārava'''</u> (‘descendant of Kuṣāru’) is the patronymic of '''[[मैत्रेय|Maitreya]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 28).<br>==Foot Notes==

कौषीतकि
<u>'''Kauṣītaki'''</u> (‘descendant of Kuṣītaka’) is the patronymic of a teacher, or series of teachers, to whom the doctrines set forth in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_763> ii. 9;<br> vii. 4, 10;<br> viii. 8;<br> xi. 5. 7;<br> xiv. 3. 4;<br> xv. 2;<br> xvi. 9;<br> xviii. 5;<br> xxii. 1. 2;<br> xxiii. 1. 4;<br> xxiv. 8. 9;<br> xxv. 8. 10. 14. 15, etc.</ref> and in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx2_ve1_763> ii. 17: xv. 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1. 7.</ref> and the Śrauta and [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] Sūtras,<ref name=fx3_ve1_763> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 15, 11;<br> vii. 21, 6;<br> ix. 20, 33;<br> xi. 11, 3. 6, etc.</ref> are referred. He is rarely mentioned elsewhere.<ref name=fx4_ve1_763> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 3, 1;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 5, 2.</ref> The doctrine of [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] is called the Kauṣītaka.<ref name=fx5_ve1_763> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1;<br> xix. 3;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 2, 13;<br> xi. 14, 26;<br> Anupada [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 7: vii. 11 viii. 5, etc.</ref> The pupils of [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] are known as the Kauṣītakis in the [[निदान|Nidāna]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx6_ve1_763> vi. 12.</ref> and in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx7_ve1_763> xvii. 4, 3.</ref>  they with [[कुषीतक|Kuṣītaka]] are stated to have been cursed by '''Luśākapi.''' Elsewhere<ref name=fx8_ve1_763> Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 1. 10;<br> Āśvalāvana Grhya [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 23.</ref> they are called Kauṣītakins. If the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx9_ve1_763> ''Cf'' Kelth, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 14, 24, 71</ref> can be trusted, there were among them at least two leading teachers, '''Kahoḍa''' and '''Sarvajit,''' the former of whom is mentioned elsewhere.<ref name=fx10_ve1_763> Sarapatna [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 3, 1;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 4, 1;<br> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 259;<br> 2, 289 ''et seq.;<br> Indian Literature,'' 44 ''et seq.;<br>'' Lindner, ''[[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],'' ix.</ref>

कौष्य
<u>'''Kauṣya,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[कोष|Koṣa]],’ is the patronymic of '''[[सुश्रवस्|Suśravas]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कौसल्य
<u>'''Kausalya,'''</u> ‘prince of [[कोसल|Kosala]],’ is the designation of '''[[पर आट्णार|Para Āṭṇāra]]''' in the Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_765> xiii 5, 4, 4.</ref> and of '''[[हिरण्यनाभ|Hiraṇyanābha]]''' in the Sāṅkhāvana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_765> xvi. 9, 13. ''Cf.'' xvi. 29, 5.</ref> Āśvalāyana is styled [[कौसल्य|Kausalya]], as ‘belonging to the [[कोसल|Kosala]] country,’ in the [[प्रश्न|Praśna]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_765> i. 1.</ref> and the Kaśī-Kausalyāḥ, or the ‘Kāśis and people of [[कोसल|Kosala]],’ are mentioned in the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_765> i. 2, 9 (spelt ''Kauśalyāḥ'').</ref>

कौसित
<u>'''Kausita'''</u> appears in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (ii. 1, 11) in connexion with the demon Kusitāyin as the name of a lake. The [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā (x. 5) has Kausida instead.<br>==Foot Notes==

कौसुरुबिन्दि
<u>'''Kausurubindi,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Kusurubinda,'''’ is the patronymic of '''Proti [[कौशाम्बेय|Kauśāmbeya]]''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xii. 2, 2, 13). In the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 4, 24) the form is Kausuravindu.<br>==Foot Notes==

कौहड
<u>'''Kauhaḍa,'''</u> ‘descendant of Kohaḍa,’ is the patronymic of a teacher, '''Mitravinda,''' mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_768> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372, 382 ''et seq.'' A school of Kauhaḍīyas is known in the Gobhila [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 34.</ref> as well as of '''[[श्रवणदत्त|Śravaṇadatta]].'''

क्रतु-जित् जानकि
<u>'''Kratu-jit Jānaki'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[जनक|Janaka]]'''’) is mentioned in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_769> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 8, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 1. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 474.</ref> as the priest of '''Rajana [[कौणेय|Kauṇeya]].''' See also '''Kratuvid.''' 

क्रतु-विद् जानकि
<u>'''Kratu-vid Jānaki'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[जनक|Janaka]]'''’) is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 34) as having learned a certain doctrine regarding Soma from Agni.<br>==Foot Notes==

क्रय
<u>'''Kraya,'''</u> ‘sale,’ is a word which does not actually occur in the Rigveda, though the verb ''krī,'' from which this noun is derived, is found there.<ref name=fx1_ve1_771> iv. 24, 10.</ref> Both noun and verb are common in the later Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx2_ve1_771> ''[[क्रय|Kraya]]:'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 2, 1;<br> vi. 1, 3, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, viii. 55;<br> xix. 13;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 2, 10, etc.;<br> ''krī:'' Av. iii. 15, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 10, 3;<br> vii. 1, 6, 2, etc.;<br> ''apa-krī:'' Av. viii. 7, 11;<br> ''pari-krī:'' Av. iv. 7, 6, etc.;<br> ''vi-krī:'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 49, etc.</ref> Sale appears to have regularly consisted in barter in the Rigveda:<ref name=fx3_ve1_771> iv. 24, 10.</ref> ten cows are regarded as a possible price for an (image of) Indra to be used as a fetish, while elsewhere not a hundred, nor a thousand, nor a myriad are considered as an adequate price (''[[शुल्क|śulka]]'') for the purchase of Indra.<ref name=fx4_ve1_771> Rv. viii. 1, 5.</ref> The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx5_ve1_771> iv. 7, 6.</ref> mentions, as possible objects of commerce, garments (''[[दूर्श|dūrśa]]''), coverlets (''[[पवस्त|pavasta]]''), and goatskins (''[[अजिन|ajina]]''). The haggling of the market was already familiar in the days of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx6_ve1_771> iv. 24, 9. See Oldenberg, ''ṚgvedaNoten,'' 1, 419, 420, correcting Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 91, and Geldner's ''Kommentar'' on iv. 24.</ref> and a characteristic hymn of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx7_ve1_771> iii. 15. See Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 352;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 111, 112.</ref> is directed to procuring success in trade. The ‘price’ was called '''[[वस्न|Vasna]],''' and the ‘merchant’ '''[[वणिज्|Vaṇij]].''' his greed being well known.<ref name=fx8_ve1_771> Rv. i. 33, 3, and See '''[[पणि|Paṇi]].'''</ref><br><br>There is little evidence of a standard of value in currency having been adopted. When no specific mention is made of the standard, the unit was probably the cow.<ref name=fx9_ve1_771> ''Cf.'' Harisvāmin on Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 2, 1, where he renders ''sahasrārha'' as equal to ‘worth a thousand cows,’ in which Eggeling follows him;<br> Saṃkṣiptasāra on Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxii. 10, 33.</ref> In a considerable number of passages of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx10_ve1_771> xii. 7, 2, 13;<br> 9, 1, 4;<br> xiii. 1, 1, 4;<br> 2, 3, 2;<br> 4, 1, 13;<br> xiv. 3, 1, 32. ''Cf.'' v. 5, 5, 16;<br> xiii. 4, 1, 6.</ref> and elsewhere,<ref name=fx11_ve1_771> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xviii. 3, 2, where a long series of compounds of numerals with ''-[[मान|māna]]'' occurs;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, viii. 5;<br> xiv. 8;<br> xxii. 8.</ref> however, the expression ''hiraṇyaṃ śata-mānam'' suggests that there must have been some standard other than  cows, though it might in all these passages be rendered as ‘gold worth a hundred cows.’ But the use of the '''[[कृष्णल|Kṛṣṇala]]''' as a measure of weight<ref name=fx12_ve1_771> ''Cf.'' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 6, 7;<br> Anupada [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 6: Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 99-103.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 255260. Barter had for the most part passed away by the time of the Jātakas, an illustration of the modern character of the society they represent. See Mrs. Rhys Davids, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1901, 874 ''et seq.''</ref> suggests that the meaning is ‘gold weighing a hundred Kṛṣṇalas,’ and this seems the more probable explanation. This unit seems not to be known in the Rigveda, where the meaning of the term '''[[मना|Manā]],''' which occurs once, is mysterious, and where necklets ('''[[निष्क|Niṣka]]''') seem to have been one of the more portable forms of wealth, like jewellery in modern India, and may perhaps have served as a means of exchange.

क्रवण
<u>'''Kravaṇa,'''</u> a word occurring only once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_772> v. 44. 9.</ref> is understood by Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_772> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 138.</ref> as the name of the [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] priest or the sacrificer. Roth considered it an adjective without at first<ref name=fx3_ve1_772> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> assigning a sense, but afterwards<ref name=fx4_ve1_772> Bo7htlingk's Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> as meaning ‘timid.’ Sāyaṇa interprets it as ‘worshipping.’ Oldenberg<ref name=fx5_ve1_772> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 342.</ref> considers the meaning uncertain, suggesting as possible ‘the slayer of the victim.’

क्रव्य
<u>'''Kravya,'''</u> ‘raw flesh,’ is never mentioned in Vedic literature as eaten by men. Demons alone are spoken of as consuming it,<ref name=fx1_ve1_773> Rv. vii. 104, 2;<br> x. 87, 2. 19;<br> 162, 2;<br> Av. iii. 28, 2;<br> iv. 36, 3: v. 29 10, etc.</ref> apart from Agni being called ''kravyād,'' ‘eating raw flesh,’ as consumer of the bodies of the dead.<ref name=fx2_ve1_773> Rv. x. 16, 9. 10. See Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 97, 165.</ref> The man who in the Rigveda is compelled by starvation to eat dog's flesh, nevertheless cooks it.<ref name=fx3_ve1_773> iv. 18, 13.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 270, 271.</ref>

क्रातु-जातेय
<u>'''Krātu-jāteya'''</u> is a patronymic of '''[[राम क्रातुजातेय|Rāma Krātujāteya]] [[वैयाघ्रपद्य|Vaiyāghrapadya]]''' in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 40, 2; iv. 16, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

क्रिमि
<u>'''Krimi.'''</u> See '''[[कृमि|Kṛmi]].''' <br>==Foot Notes==

क्रिवि
<u>'''Krivi'''</u> is asserted in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_776> xiii. 5, 4, 7.</ref> to have been the older name of the '''Pañcālas.''' This statement is supported by the name of the king there mentioned, '''[[क्रैव्य|Kraivya]] [[पाञ्चाल|Pāñcāla]],''' The Krivis appear in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_776> viii. 20, 24;<br> 22, 12. ElsewhereKrivi is doubtful in sense. In several passages (i. 30, 1;<br> viii. 87, 1;<br> ix. 9, 6, and perhaps i. 166, 6, where ''krivir-datī'' is an epithet of lightning) Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' i. 166, 341, understands the word to mean ‘horse.’ Elsewhere (ii. 17, 6;<br> 22, 2;<br> viii. 51, 8) he takes it to be a proper name, while in v. 44, 4, he is doubtful. In the passages last cited this view may very well be correct.</ref> as settled on the '''[[सिन्धु|Sindhu]]''' and the '''[[असिक्नी|Asiknī]].''' It is a plausible conjecture of Zimmer's<ref name=fx3_ve1_776> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 103.</ref> that with the '''Kurus''' they made up the '''[[वैकर्ण|Vaikarṇa]]''' people.<ref name=fx4_ve1_776> ''Cf.'' '''[[कवष|Kavaṣa]].'''</ref> The importance of the Pañcālas, and the insignificance of the Krivis, may be explained in part by the fact that the later Kuru-[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]] alliance included the '''Bharatas.''' It is also probable, as Oldenberg<ref name=fx5_ve1_776> ''Buddha,'' 404.</ref> suggests, from the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx6_ve1_776> xiii. 5, 4, 16.</ref> that the '''Turvaśas''' were included in the Pañcālas, and as the latter name indicates, probably other tribes also. Or, if Hopkins' view<ref name=fx7_ve1_776> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 258 ''et seq.'' This view is hardly convincing, while the disappearance of the Turvaśas is easily to be accounted for by their being merged, along with the Krivis, in the Pañcālas. The name of [[क्रिवि|Krivi]] is lost in the Epic as completely as that of [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] (Pargiter, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1910, 48, notes 4, 5).<br><br>''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 155, 157;<br> Grierson, ''Journal of the Royal Astatic Society,'' 1908, 602-607;<br> Keith, ''ibid.,'' 831 ''et seq.;<br>'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 152, 153;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xli.;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 407.</ref> is accepted that [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] was king of the Yadus, the latter may in part have been allied with the Krivis to form the Pañcālas.

क्रीत वैत-होत्र
<u>'''Krīta Vaita-hotra'''</u> (‘descendant of Vītahotra’) is mentioned in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (iv. 2, 6) in connexion with the '''Kurus.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

क्रुञ्च्
<u>'''1. Kruñc,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_778> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 6;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxviii. 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 73 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 2, 1-3.</ref> '''Kruñca,'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_778> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 22. 31 (in xxv. 6 the sense is quite uncertain);<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 3.</ref> '''[[क्रौञ्च|Krauñca]],'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_778> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 12, 1.</ref> are variant forms denoting the ‘curlew’ or ‘snipe.’ To it is attributed in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_778/>  the faculty, later assigned to the '''[[हंस|Haṃsa]],''' of extracting milk from water when the two fluids are mixed.<ref name=fx4_ve1_778> Lanman, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 151-158;<br> Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 150.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 91, 92.</ref>

क्रुन्च् आङ्गिरस
<u>'''2. Krunc Āṅgirasa'''</u> is in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_779> xiii. 9, 11;<br> 11, 20.</ref> the name of the seer of a Sāman or Chant called the [[क्रौञ्च|Krauñca]]. It is doubtless invented to explain the name of the Chant on the ordinary principle that Sāmans are called after their authors, though this rule has many exceptions.<ref name=fx2_ve1_779> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 68. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 160.</ref>

क्रुमु
<u>'''Krumu'''</u> is the name of a stream mentioned twice in the Rigveda--once in the fifth book<ref name=fx1_ve1_780> v. 53, 9.</ref> and once in the last, in the [[नदी|Nadī]]-[[स्तुति|stuti]], or ‘praise of rivers.’<ref name=fx2_ve1_780> x. 75, 6.</ref> There can be little doubt that this river is identical with the modern Kurum, a western tributary of the Indus.<ref name=fx3_ve1_780> Roth, ''[[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], Erläuterungen,'' 43;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 14: Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 200.</ref>

क्रुमुक
<u>'''Krumuka'''</u> as the name of ‘wood’ appears to be a variant form of [[कृमुक|Kṛmuka]].<br><br>^1) [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 9, 3; [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 7, 3.<br>==Foot Notes==

क्रैव्य। पाञ्चाल
<u>'''Kraivya. Pāñcāla,'''</u> the king of the '''Krivis,'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_782> So the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 125, n.;<br> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 409, n.</ref> is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_782> xiii. 5, 4, 7.</ref> as having performed the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or horse sacrifice, on the '''[[परिवक्रा|Parivakrā]].''' Eggeling,<ref name=fx3_ve1_782> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 397 (but ''cf.'' p. 398, top).</ref> however, takes the word as a proper name, ‘Kraivya, the [[पाञ्चाल|Pāñcāla]] king.’

क्रोश
<u>'''Krośa,'''</u> as a measure of distance (lit. ‘a shout,’ as expressing the range of the voice), is found in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_783> xvi. 13, 12. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 8, 432 ''et seq.'' In the later literature it is equivalent to about two miles. The word still survives in the vernacular form of Kos as the most popular measure of distance in India.</ref> 

क्रोष्टृ
<u>'''Kroṣṭṛ'''</u> (lit. ‘howler’), the ‘jackal,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_784> x. 28, 1.</ref> as by nature cowardly compared with the wild boar ('''[[वराह|Varāha]]'''). In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_784> xi. 2, 2.</ref> it is spoken of as devouring corpses. The word also occurs in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx3_ve1_784> xxiv. 32.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 84.</ref> where the commentator glosses it with [[सृगाल|Sṛgāla]], another name of the jackal. See also '''[[लोपाश|Lopāśa]].'''

क्रौञ्च
<u>'''1. Krauñca.'''</u> See '''[[क्रुञ्च्|Kruñc]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

क्रौञ्च
<u>'''2. Krauñca,'''</u> as the name of a mountain, occurs only in the latest Vedic literature.<ref name=fx1_ve1_786> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 31, 2. See Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 93;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 78.</ref>

क्रौञ्चिकी-पुत्र
<u>'''Krauñcikī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of [[क्रौञ्च|Krauñca]],’ is mentioned as a pupil of '''Vaiṭṭabhatīputra'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_787> [[वैदभृती-पुत्र|Vaidabhṛtī-putra]] in the Mādhyaṃdina recension, vi. 4, 32.</ref> in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_787> vi. 5, 2 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref>

क्रौष्टुकि
<u>'''Krauṣṭuki,'''</u> ‘descendant of Kroṣṭuka,’ is mentioned as a grammarian in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_788> viii. 2.</ref> the Bṛhaddevatā,<ref name=fx2_ve1_788> iv. 137. ''Cf. Indische Studien,'' 1, 105.</ref> and the [[छन्दस्|Chandas]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_788> 5.</ref> but as an astrologer in a Pariśiṣṭa of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx4_ve1_788> Weber, Berlin Catalogue of Sanskrit MSS., 1, 94. See Bolling and von Negelein. ''The Pariśiṣṭas of the Atharvaveda,'' 2, 438 ''et seq.,'' where in Pariśiṣṭa lxviii (Svapnādhyāyaḥ), i. 2;<br> ii. 8, the name appears as Kroṣṭuki.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''[[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]],'' 12;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 61.</ref>

क्वयी
<u>'''Kvayī'''</u> is the name of some species of bird in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_789> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 17, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 29.</ref> occurring in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or horse sacrifice. The form in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_789> iii. 14, 18.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 99</ref> is [[कुवय|Kuvaya]]. 

क्वल
<u>'''Kvala'''</u> is a substance, perhaps<ref name=fx1_ve1_790> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> identical with '''[[कुवल|Kuvala]],''' the fruit of the jujube, used to coagulate milk according to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve1_790> ii. 5, 3, 5. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 227.</ref>

क्षत
<u>'''Kṣata'''</u> is regarded by Zimmer<ref name=fx1_ve1_791> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 377.</ref> as denoting a special disease (a sort of ''Phthisis pulmonalis'') in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_791> vii. 76, 4 (where the reading is doubtful, the text having ''akṣita.'' See '''[[अक्षत|Akṣata]]''').</ref> but the word is probably only an adjective.<ref name=fx3_ve1_791> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 509;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 442.</ref>

क्षत्तृ
<u>'''Kṣattṛ'''</u> is a word of frequent occurrence in the later Saṃhitās and Brāhmaṇas, denoting a member of the royal entourage, but the sense is somewhat uncertain. In the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_792> vi. 13, 2.</ref> it is used of a god as the ‘distributor’ of good things to his worshippers; the same sense seems to be found in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_792> iii. 24, 7;<br> v. 17, 4.</ref> and elsewhere.<ref name=fx3_ve1_792> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 6;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 9, 16.</ref> In one passage of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx4_ve1_792> xxx. 13. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 3, 5.</ref> the interpretation ‘doorkeeper’ is given by the commentator Mahīdhara, a sense which seems possible in other passages,<ref name=fx5_ve1_792> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 4, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 13;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1, 5;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xix. 1, 4.</ref> while Sāyaṇa ascribes to it in one passage of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx6_ve1_792> v. 3, 1, 7. ''Cf.'' on xiii. 4, 2, 5 (''āyavyayādhyakṣa''), and Harisvāmin on xiii. 5, 4, 6 (''kośādhyakṣa''). The scholiast on the Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 3, 9. has ''mantrī dūto vā;<br>'' on xx. 1, 16, ''pratīhāro dūto vā.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 61, etc., renders it ‘chamberlain.’</ref> the more dignified meaning of ''antaḥpurādhyakṣa,'' ‘a chamberlain.’ In other passages,<ref name=fx7_ve1_792> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 26;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 7, 1, with the scholiast's note, and ''ibid., [[अनुक्षत्तृ|anukṣattṛ]],'' rendered as ''sārather [[अनुचर|anucara]],'' ‘the attendant of the charioteer’;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 1, 20, with the scholiast's note.</ref> again, the sense of ‘charioteer’ is not unlikely. Later the [[क्षत्तृ|Kṣattṛ]] was regarded as a man of mixed caste.<ref name=fx8_ve1_792> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 481.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 2, 36;<br> 17, 290;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> 

क्षत्र
<u>'''1. Kṣatra,'''</u> in the general sense of ‘dominion,’ ‘rule,’ ‘power,’ as exercised by gods and men, occurs frequently from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_793> i. 24, 11;<br> 136, 1. 3;<br> iv. 17. 1;<br> v. 62, 6, etc.;<br> Av. iii. 5, 2;<br> v. 18, 4, etc. So ''[[क्षत्र|kṣatra]]-[[श्री|śrī]],'' Rv. i. 25, 5;<br> vi. 26. 8;<br> ''[[क्षत्र|kṣatra]]-bhṛt,'' ‘bringers of lordship.’ [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 7, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 6, 12;<br> 7, 6, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxvii. 7, etc.</ref> onwards. The word is also found in the concrete sense of ‘rulers’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_793> Singular: i. 157, 2;<br> viii. 35, 17.</ref> and later;<ref name=fx3_ve1_793> Plural: Av. iv. 22, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 17;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 6, 3.</ref> but in no case does it in the Rigveda certainly<ref name=fx4_ve1_793> See Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' and '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]].'''</ref> mean what it regularly denotes in the later Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx5_ve1_793> Av. ii. 15, 4: ix. 7, 9;<br> xii. 5, 8;<br> xv. 10, 5, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 1, 2;<br> ii. 2, 11, 2, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, v. 27;<br> xiv. 24;<br> xviii. 38, etc. See other citations under '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]].'''</ref> the ruling class as opposed to the priests ('''[[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]]'''), the subject people ('''[[विश्|Viś]], [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]]'''), and the servile class ('''[[शूद्र|Śūdra]]'''). See also '''[[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]].''' A [[क्षत्र|Kṣatra]]-pati is several times mentioned<ref name=fx6_ve1_793> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 14, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 17;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 8, 5;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 2, 2.</ref> as an equivalent of ‘king.’

क्षत्र
<u>'''2. Kṣatra'''</u> seems to be the name of a man mentioned with others, including '''[[मनस|Manasa]], [[यजत|Yajata]],''' and '''[[अवत्सार|Avatsāra]],''' in one quite obscure passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_794> v. 44, 10. ''Cf.'' Ludwig. Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 138.</ref>

क्षत्र-विद्या
<u>'''Kṣatra-vidyā,'''</u> ‘the science of the ruling class,’ is mentioned in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_795> vii. 1, 2. 4;<br> 2, 1;<br> 7, 1.</ref> Śaṅkara glosses the term with ''dhanur-veda,'' ‘the science of the bow,’ which is the most probable sense.<ref name=fx2_ve1_795> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 104.</ref>

क्षत्रिय
<u>'''Kṣatriya.'''</u>--As the origin of caste, the relation of the castes, intermarriage, and cognate matters may most conveniently be discussed under '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]],''' this article will be confined to determining, as far as possible, the real character of the class called Kṣatriyas, or collectively '''[[क्षत्र|Kṣatra]].'''<br><br>The evidence of the Jātakas<ref name=fx1_ve1_796>See Fick, ''Die sociale Gliederung im nordo7stlichen Indien zu Buddhas Zoit,'' 59 ''et seq.;<br>'' Rhys Davids, ''Dialogues of the Buddha,'' 1, 95 ''et seq.;<br> Buddhist India,'' 52 ''et seq.''</ref> points to the word Khattiya  denoting the members of the old Āryan nobility who had led the tribes to conquest, '''as well''' as those families of the aborigines who had managed to maintain their princely status in spite of the conquest. In the epic<ref name=fx2_ve1_796> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 73 ''et seq.''</ref> also the term [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] seems to include these persons, but it has probably a wider signification than Khattiya, and would cover all the royal military vassals and feudal chiefs, expressing, in fact, pretty much the same as the ''barones'' of early English history. Neither in the Jātakas<ref name=fx3_ve1_796> Fick, ''op. cit.,'' 52, n. 2.</ref> nor in the epic<ref name=fx4_ve1_796> Hopkins, ''op. cit.,'' 184 ''et seq.,'' 190.</ref> is the term co-extensive with all warriors; the army contains many besides the Kṣatriyas, who are the leaders or officers, rather than the rank and file.<br><br>In the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx5_ve1_796> Av. vi. 76, 3. 4;<br> xii. 5, 5. 44. 46, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 5, etc. See '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]]''' and '''[[राजन्य|Rājanya]].'''</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx6_ve1_796> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 24, etc.;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 2, 15;<br> iv. 1, 4, 5. 6, etc. See '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]].'''</ref> the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] stands as a definite member of the social body, distinct from the priest, the subject people, and the slaves, '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]],''' and '''[[शूद्र|Śūdra]].''' It is significant that [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] is a variant to [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]], and an earlier one. Hence it is reasonable to suppose that the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] and [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] are both of similar origin, being princely or connected with royalty. Moreover, the early use of [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] in the Rigveda<ref name=fx7_ve1_796> iv. 12, 3;<br> 42, 1;<br> v. 69, 1;<br> vii. 64, 2;<br> viii. 25, 8;<br> 56, 1;<br> x. 109, 3. ''Cf.'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iv. 19;<br> x. 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 7, 7.</ref> is exclusively connected with royal authority or divine authority.<br><br>It is impossible to say exactly what persons would be included in the term [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]. That it covered the royal house and the various branches of the royal family may be regarded as certain. It, no doubt, also included the nobles and their families: this would explain the occasional opposition of [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] and [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]], as in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx8_ve1_796> vii. 20. ''Cf.'' [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxiv. 18, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xx. 1.</ref> where a [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] asks a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] for a place for sacrifice (''deva-yajana''). Thus, when strictly applied, [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] would have a wider denotation than [[राजन्य|Rājanya]]. As a rule, however, the two expressions are identical, and both are used as evidence in what follows. That [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] ever included the mere fighting  man has not been proved: in the Rigveda<ref name=fx9_ve1_796> In the following passages there is reference to the people (''[[विश्|viś]]'') fighting: i. 69, 3;<br> 126, 5 (''cf.,'' however, Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 121);<br> iv. 24, 4;<br> vi. 26, 1;<br> vii. 79, 2;<br> viii. 18, 18;<br> 96, 15;<br> probably also vii. 33, 6, where the ''Tṛtsūnāṃ viśaḥ'' means ‘the subjects of the [[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]] princes,’ as Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 136, thinks. In vi. 41, 5, on the other hand, the people and wars (''pṛtanāsu'') are contrasted, the normal rule of the common folk being peace.</ref> and later<ref name=fx10_ve1_796> In Av. ix. 7, 9, the people are clearly designated as ''balam,'' or ‘force,’ a regular term later for an armed force. The later law books (''e.g.,'' [[गौतम|Gautama]], vii. 6;<br> [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]], ii. 22) allow even Brahmins to maintain themselves by the occupation of Kṣatriyas in case of need. For the Epic, ''cf.'' Hopkins, ''op. cit.,'' 94, 95;<br> 184 ''et seq.''</ref> others than Kṣatriyas regularly fought; but possibly if the nobles had retinues as the kings had, [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] would embrace those retainers who had military functions. The term did not apply to all members of the royal entourage; for example, the '''Grāmaṇī''' was usually a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]].<br><br>The connexion of the Kṣatriyas with the Brahmins was very close. The prosperity of the two is repeatedly asserted<ref name=fx11_ve1_796> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 10, 3;<br> Maitrayaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 3;<br> iii. 1, 9;<br> 2, 3;<br> iv. 3, 9;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxix. 10;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, v. 27;<br> vii. 21;<br> xviii. 14;<br> xix. 5;<br> xxxviii. 14, etc.;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 11, 9;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 22;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 1, 7;<br> iii. 5, 2, 11;<br> 6, 1, 17;<br> vi. 6, 3, 14. The superiority of the [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] to all other castes is asserted in [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 10, 1, etc. The superiority of the Brahmin to the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] is sometimes asserted--''e.g.,'' in the Atharvaveda hymns, v. 18. 19;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxi. 21;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 1, 9, 1;<br> 3, 7, 8. So the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]] sacrifice of the king is inferior to the highest sacrifice (the [[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]]) of the priest (''ibid.,'' v. 1, 1, 12), and though the Brahmin goes after the king, he is yet stronger than he (v. 4, 2, 7, and v. 4, 4, 15). ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''op. cit.,'' 76.</ref> to be indissolubly associated, especially in the relation of king ('''[[राजन्|Rājan]]''') and domestic priest ('''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]]'''). Sometimes there was feud between [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] and Brahmin.<ref name=fx12_ve1_796> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxviii. 5;<br> Av. v. 18. 19.</ref> His management of the sacrifice then gave the Brahmin power to ruin the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] by embroiling him with the people<ref name=fx13_ve1_796> ''E.g.,'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 11, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 6, 5;<br> ii. 1, 9;<br> iii. 3, 10;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxix. 8, etc.</ref> or with other Kṣatriyas.<ref name=fx14_ve1_796> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 3, 10, etc.</ref><br><br>Towards the common people, on the other hand, the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] stood in a relation of well-nigh unquestioned superiority.<ref name=fx15_ve1_796> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvi. 4;<br> xxi. 10;<br> xxii. 9;<br> xxix. 9. 10;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 33;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 2, 7, 15. 16, etc.;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 4, 9. 10;<br> 6, 8, etc.</ref> There are, however, references to occasional feuds between  the people and the nobles,<ref name=fx16_ve1_796> ''Cf.'' note 13;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 4, 6, 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 6, 7.</ref> in which no doubt the inferior numbers of the latter were compensated by their superior arms and prowess. In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx17_ve1_796> vii. 29. ''Cf.'' '''[[राजन्|Rājan]].'''</ref> the [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] is described as tributary to another (''anyasya bali-kṛt''), to be devoured by another (''anyasyādya''), and to be oppressed at will (''yathākāma-jyeya''). Probably these epithets apply most strictly to the relation of the king and his people, but the passage shows that the people were greatly at the mercy of the nobles. No doubt the king granted to them the right, which may have been hereditary, to be supported by the common people, whose feudal superiors they thus became. In return for these privileges the Kṣatriyas had probably duties of protection to perform, as well as some judicial functions, to judge from an obscure passage of the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx18_ve1_796> xxvii. 4 (''tasmād rājanyenādhyakṣeṇa vaiśyaṃ ghnanti,'' ‘so with a [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] as a supervisor[?] they smite a Vaiśya’). It is not clear whether ''han'' here means ‘kill’ or ‘beat.’</ref><br><br>The main duty of the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] in the small states<ref name=fx19_ve1_796> See Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 30, n. 2.</ref> of the Vedic period was readiness for war. The bow is thus his special attribute,<ref name=fx20_ve1_796> Av. xviii. 2, 60;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xviii. 9;<br> xxxvii. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 5, 30;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, vi. 1, 3. In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 19, the list is longer--chariot, breastplate ('''[[कवच|Kavaca]]'''), bow and arrow (''[[इषु|iṣu]]-[[धन्वन्|dhanvan]]'')--and in the prayer for the prosperity of the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] (called, as usual in the older texts, [[राजन्य|Rājanya]]), at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], the Rājanva is to be an archer and a good chariot-fighter;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 18, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 12, 6;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], v. 14;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 2. So Indra is the god of the Kṣatriyas, Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 1;<br> iv. 5, 8, etc.</ref> just as the goad is that of the agriculturist; for the bow is the main weapon of the Veda. Whether the Kṣatriyas paid much attention to mental occupations is uncertain. In the latest stratum of the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] literature there are references to learned princes like '''[[जनक|Janaka]]''' of '''[[विदेह|Videha]],''' who is said to have become a Brahmin (''brahmā''), apparently in the sense that he had the full knowledge which a Brahmin possessed.<ref name=fx21_ve1_796> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 6, 2, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1. See Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Litcrature,'' 421 ''et seq.;<br>'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 426 ''et seq.'' Similarly at the Dīkṣā a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] becomes temporarily a Brahmin, [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 23.<br><br>''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 1, 3.</ref> Other learned Kṣatriyas of this period were  '''[[प्रवाहण जैवलि|Pravāhaṇa Jaivali]],'''<ref name=fx22_ve1_796> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 1;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 8, 1;<br> v. 3, 1;<br> Muir, ''op. cit.,'' 433-435;<br> 515;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 117;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 1, lxxv.</ref> '''[[अश्वपति|Aśvapati]] [[कैकेय|Kaikeya]],'''<ref name=fx23_ve1_796> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 6, 1, 2 ''et seq.''</ref> and [[अजातशत्रु|Ajātaśatru]].<ref name=fx24_ve1_796> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1.</ref> Garbe,<ref name=fx25_ve1_796> ''Beiträge zur indischen Kulturgeschichte,'' 1 ''et seq. Cf.'' Deussen, ''Philosophy of the Upanishads,'' 17 ''et seq.;<br>'' Winterniz, ''Geschichte der indischen Litteratur,'' 1, 199.</ref> Grierson,<ref name=fx26_ve1_796> Article ‘Bhakti’ in ''Encyclopœdia of Religion and Ethics;<br> Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 843.</ref> and others believe they are justified in holding the view that the Ksatriyas developed a special philosophy of their own as opposed to Brahminism, which appears later as Bhakti, or Faith. On the other hand, there is clear evidence<ref name=fx27_ve1_796> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 1, 4, 10.<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg. ''Buddha,'' 73, n. 1;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āranyaka,'' 50, 257;<br> ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 868, 883, 1140-1142. Professor Eggeling concurs in the view that the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] share in the religious movement was not substantially real.</ref> that the opinion of Ksatriyas on such topics were held in little respect, and it must be remembered that to attribute wisdom to a king was a delicate and effective piece of flattery. There are earlier references to royal sages (''[[राजन्यर्षि|rājanyarṣi]]''),<ref name=fx28_ve1_796> ''E.g.,'' in Pañcavimśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 12, 6;<br> but see on this Oldenberg. ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 235, n., and '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]].'''</ref> but it is very doubtful if much stress can be laid on them, and none can be laid on the later tradition of Sāyaṇa.<ref name=fx29_ve1_796> Cited in Muir, ''op. cit.,'' 12, 265 ''et seq.''</ref> Again, the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx30_ve1_796> ii. 10.</ref> gives a tradition relating how '''Devāpi,''' a king's son, became the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of his younger brother '''[[शंतनु|Śaṃtanu]];''' but it is very doubtful if the story can really be traced with Sieg<ref name=fx31_ve1_796> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 91 ''et seq.'' See '''Devāpi.'''</ref> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx32_ve1_796> x. 98. The case of '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]''' may also be cited;<br> but his royal rank, which is attested by the mention of him as a [[राजपुत्र|Rājaputra]] in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 17, is at most merely a matter of descent, and is of very doubtful authenticity. See under '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]].'''</ref> itself. In any case, the stories refer only to a few selected Kṣatriyas of high rank, while there is no evidence that the average [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] was concerned with intellectual pursuits. Nor is there any reference to Kṣatriyas engaging in agriculture or in trade or commerce. It may be assumed that the duties of administration and war were adequate to absorb his attention. On the other hand, we do hear of a [[राजन्य|Rājanya]]  as a lute player and singer at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] or horse sacrifice.<ref name=fx33_ve1_796> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 3, 5. This mention is proof of the existence of a class of [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] bards (as opposed to priestly reciters), from whose productions the Epic naturally grew up.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 258.</ref><br><br>Of the training and education of a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] we have no record; presumably, as in fact if not in theory later on, he was mainly instructed in the art of war, the science of the bow, and the rudimentary administrative functions which would devolve on him. At this early state of the development of the nobility which appears to be represented in the Rigveda, it was probably not unusual or impossible for a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] to become a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]; at least, this assumption best explains the phrase<ref name=fx34_ve1_796> vii. 104, 13. ''Cf.'' for a similarly false claim to be a Brahmin, x. 71, 8.</ref> ‘claiming falsely a Kṣatriya's rank’ (''kṣatriyaṃ mithuyā dhārayantam'').<br><br>The king and the Kṣatriyas must have stood in a particularly close relation. The former being the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] ''par excellence,'' it is to him rather than to the ordinary [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] that we must refer passages like that in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx35_ve1_796> vii. 1, 1, 8.</ref> where it is said that the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]], with the consent of the clansmen, gives a settlement to a man: clearly a parallel to the rule found among many peoples that the chief, but only with the consent of the people, can make a grant of unoccupied land. In the same [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx36_ve1_796> xii. 8, 3, 19;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 254, n. 1.</ref> it is said that a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] consecrates a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]], a clear reference, as the commentator explains, to the practice of the old king consecrating the prince (''kumāra'') who is to succeed him; and again,<ref name=fx37_ve1_796> ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''ibid.,'' 41, 259.</ref> the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] and the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] are regarded as alone complete in contrast with other people, the parallel with the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] here suggesting that the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] ''par excellence'' is meant. On the other hand, the king is sometimes contrasted with the [[राजन्य|Rājanya]].<ref name=fx38_ve1_796> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 2, 17, and see '''[[राजन्य|Rājanya]].'''</ref><br><br>The [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] literature contains elaborate rules<ref name=fx39_ve1_796> See references in Bühler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 14, 395, 396.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 212 ''et seq.;<br>'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 231 ''et seq.;<br>'' von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 151 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 4 ''et seq.'' (where practically every passage on the subject is cited or referred to);<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 98 ''et seq.'' (for the Epic parallels).</ref> for the educa-  tion and occupations of Kṣatriyas, but their contents cannot always be traced in the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] literature, and their value is questionable.

क्ष-पावन्
<u>'''Kṣa-pāvan,'''</u> ‘protector of the earth,’<ref name=fx1_ve1_797> The word occurs only in the nominative singular as ''kṣapāvān,'' which would be the regular form from a stem ''kṣapāvant;<br>'' but it is probably an irregularity for ''kṣapāvā. Cf.'' Oldenberg. ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 72.</ref> is an epithet of a king,<ref name=fx2_ve1_797> iii. 55, 17.</ref> or denotes a king<ref name=fx3_ve1_797> i. 70, 5;<br> vii. 10, 5;<br> viii. 71, 2;<br> x. 29, 1. ''Cf. [[क्षिति|kṣiti]]-pa,'' ‘guardian of earth,’ ‘king,’ in later Sanskrit.</ref> in the Rigveda. The word is significant, as showing the function of the king as the protector of the tribal territory.

क्षिति
<u>'''Kṣiti'''</u> is in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_798> i. 65, 3;<br> iii. 13, 4;<br> v. 37. 4, etc.</ref> a regular word for ‘dwelling,’ and in particular the ''kṣitir [[ध्रुवा|dhruvā]],'' ‘the secure dwelling,’ is mentioned<ref name=fx2_ve1_798> i. 73, 4 (''cf.'' 2);<br> vii. 88, 7. See Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 142.</ref> in a context that shows it, to be equivalent to the '''[[वृजन|Vṛjana]]''' or '''[[ग्राम|Grāma]]''' regarded as a stronghold. From this sense is developed that of the peoples occupying the settlements,<ref name=fx3_ve1_798> Rv. iii. 38, 1;<br> iv. 24, 4;<br> 38, 5;<br> v. 1, 10, etc.</ref> and in particular the five peoples<ref name=fx4_ve1_798> i. 7, 9;<br> 176, 3;<br> v. 35, 2;<br> vi. 46, 7;<br> vii. 75, 4;<br> 79, 1.</ref> (for whom see '''Pañca Janāsaḥ''').

क्षिप्त
<u>'''Kṣipta,'''</u> ‘a wound’ (caused by shooting), or ‘bruise’ (caused by throwing), is mentioned in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_799> vi. 109, 1. 3. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 389.</ref> together with a remedy for it, the '''Pippalī.'''

क्षिप्र-श्येन
<u>'''Kṣipra-śyena,'''</u> ‘swift falcon,’ is the name of a bird in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (iii. 14, 11) and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] x. 5, 2, 10).<br>==Foot Notes==

क्षीर
<u>'''Kṣīra,'''</u> ‘milk,’ also called '''Go''' or '''[[पयस्|Payas]],''' played a large part in the economy of the Vedic Indians.<ref name=fx1_ve1_801> The word ''[[क्षीर|kṣīra]]'' does not occur in Rv. ii. vii. It is found in i. 109, 3;<br> 164, 7;<br> viii. 2, 9;<br> ix. 67, 32;<br> x. 87, 16 (= Av. viii. 3, 15). See Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 64, 73 ''et seq.'' See also Av. ii. 26, 4;<br> v. 19, 5;<br> x. 9, 12, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 8, 7, etc.</ref> It was taken warm (''[[पक्व|pakva]]''  as it came from the cow,<ref name=fx2_ve1_801>i. 62, 9;<br> 180, 3;<br> iii. 30, 4.</ref> or was used with grain to make a ‘mess cooked with milk’ (''[[क्षीर|kṣīra]]-pākam odanam'').<ref name=fx3_ve1_801>Rv. viii. 77, 10;<br> Av. xiii. 2, 20. ''Cf. [[क्षीर|kṣīra]]-[[श्री|śrī]],'' ‘milk-mixed,’ [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 4, 0, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, viii. 57, etc.</ref> It was also used for mixing with Soma ('''[[अभिश्री|Abhiśrī]], [[आशिर्|Āśir]]'''). From it butter ('''[[घृत|Ghṛta]]''') was made. Milk was also curdled, the '''Pūtīkā''' and '''[[क्वल|Kvala]]''' plants, among others, being used for the purpose.<ref name=fx4_ve1_801> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 3, 5.</ref> The curdled milk ('''[[दधि|Dadhi]]''') was undoubtedly used for food; and a kind of cheese is perhaps referred to in one passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx5_ve1_801> vi. 48, 18.</ref> Goat's milk (''aja-[[क्षीर|kṣīra]]'') is also mentioned.<ref name=fx6_ve1_801> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1, 2, 13;<br> see '''Aja.'''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 63, 226, 226, 268.</ref>

क्षीरौदन
<u>'''Kṣīraudana,'''</u> ‘rice cooked with milk,’ is mentioned frequently in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ii. 5, 3, 4; xi. 5, 7, 5, etc.).<br>==Foot Notes==

क्षुद्र-सूक्तस्
<u>'''Kṣudra-sūktas,'''</u> ‘makers of short hymns,’ is the name given in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx1_ve1_803> ii. 2, 2. ''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 212, and Macdonell, ''Bṛhaddevatā.'' notes on iii. 116.</ref> to the authors of certain hymns of the Rigveda. ''Cf.'' '''[[महासूक्त|Mahāsūkta]].'''

क्षुम्प
<u>'''Kṣumpa'''</u> is a word occurring only in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_804> i. 84, 8.</ref> where it seems to mean a ‘bush.’ The [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_804> v. 16. ''Cf.'' Benfey, ''[[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]], Glossar,'' 53.</ref> identifies it with the Ahichatraka, a ‘mushroom.’

क्षुर
<u>'''Kṣura'''</u> occurs three times in the Rigveda. The word appears to have the general sense of ‘blade’<ref name=fx1_ve1_805> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 61, 69. ''Cf.'' 13, 292 (as ‘knife’ in the Epic).</ref> in one passage,<ref name=fx2_ve1_805> i. 166, 10 (''paviṣu kṣurāḥ'' on the fellies of the Maruts' car;<br> possibly ‘razors’ may be meant, as Max Müller says in his note on this passage, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 235, n. 4).</ref> possibly also in another,<ref name=fx3_ve1_805> x. 28, 9, where Sāyaṇa renders it as meaning ‘having claws.’ The later tradition ascribes the swallowing to a goat.</ref> where it is said that the hare swallowed a  [[क्षुर|Kṣura]], and where the sense ‘blade’ is adequate. In the third passage<ref name=fx4_ve1_805> viii. 4, 16 (''saṃ naḥ śiśīhi bhurijor iva kṣuram,'' ‘sharpen us like a razor on a grindstone or stropping apparatus’).</ref> there seems to be a reference to the sharpening of a razor on a grindstone<ref name=fx5_ve1_805> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> (''bhurijos,'' the dual denoting precisely, as Pischel<ref name=fx6_ve1_805> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 243.</ref> points out, the two sides of the apparatus, between which the stone revolved like the modern grindstone). But Muir,<ref name=fx7_ve1_805> ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 466.</ref> following another view of Roth,<ref name=fx8_ve1_805> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. [[भुरिज्|bhurij]].''</ref> adopts the sense ‘the edge of scissors,’ which, however, hardly suits the other passage, one in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx9_ve1_805> xx. 127, 4.</ref> where a [[क्षुर|Kṣura]] is described as moving about on the ''bhurijos,''<ref name=fx10_ve1_805> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 197, translates ''bhurijos'' by ‘on a strop.’</ref> as the tongue on the lip. The meaning ‘razor’ is perfectly clear in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx11_ve1_805> vi. 68, 1. 3;<br> viii. 2, 7.</ref> where shaving by means of it is mentioned; in many other passages<ref name=fx12_ve1_805> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 4, 5;<br> iii. 1, 2, 7;<br> ''[[क्षुर|kṣura]]-pavi,'' Av. xii. 5, 20. 55;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 5, 7;<br> 5, 5, 6;<br> v. 6, 6, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 6, 2, 9. etc.;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 10, 14;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvi. 8;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 5.</ref> either sense is adequate. A ''kṣuro bhṛjvān'' occurs in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]]:<ref name=fx13_ve1_805> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 12, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 8, 7;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xv. 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 5, 2, 4.</ref> it seems to denote, as Bloomfield<ref name=fx14_ve1_805> ''American Journal of Philology,'' 17, 418.</ref> suggests, a razor with a strop (in the shape of a small grinding apparatus). [[क्षुर|Kṣura]]-[[धारा|dhārā]]<ref name=fx15_ve1_805> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 13, 9.</ref> denotes ‘the edge of a razor,’ like ''kṣurasya [[धारा|dhārā]].''<ref name=fx16_ve1_805> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 3, 2.</ref> In the Upaniṣads<ref name=fx17_ve1_805> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 20.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 266;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 239-243;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 38 ''et seq.''</ref> a razor-case ([[क्षुर|Kṣura]]-dhāna) is mentioned. See also '''[[श्मश्रु|Śmaśru]].'''

क्षेत्र
<u>'''Kṣetra,'''</u> ‘field.’ The use of this word in the Rigveda points clearly to the existence of separate fields<ref name=fx1_ve1_806> x. 33, 6. ''Cf.'' iii. 31, 15;<br> v. 62, 7.</ref> carefully measured off,<ref name=fx2_ve1_806> i. 110, 5.</ref> though in some passages the meaning is less definite,  indicating cultivated land generally.<ref name=fx3_ve1_806> i. 100, 18;<br> ix. 85, 4;<br> 91, 6;<br> ''Kṣetrajeṣa,'' i. 33, 15, ‘acquisition of land’;<br> ''kṣetrā-sā,'' iv. 38, 1, ‘gaining land’;<br> ''kṣetraṃ-jaya,'' ‘conquering cultivated land,’ Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 11. The wider sense of ‘place’ also occurs, v. 2, 3;<br> 45, 9;<br> vi. 47, 20, etc., and often later.</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_806> iv. 18, 5;<br> v. 31, 4;<br> x. 1, 18;<br> xi. 1, 22;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 1, 2;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vii. 24, 2, etc.</ref> and later the sense of a separate field is clearly marked, though the more general use is also found.<ref name=fx5_ve1_806> Av. ii. 29, 3;<br> xiv. 2, 7;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 1, 15. 16, etc.</ref> The deity Kṣetrasya Pati,<ref name=fx6_ve1_806> Rv. iv. 37, 1, 2;<br> vii. 35, 10;<br> x. 66, 13;<br> Av. ii. 8, 5;<br> ''kṣetrasya [[पत्नी|patnī]],'' ‘Mistress of the Field,’ 12, 1;<br> ''kṣetrāṇāṃ patiḥ,'' ‘Lord of Fields,’ Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 18.</ref> ‘Lord of the Field,’ should probably be understood as the god presiding over each field, just as Vāstoṣ Pati presides over each dwelling.<ref name=fx7_ve1_806> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 138.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 236;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 1, 1, 8, where the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]], with the consent of the people, gives a settlement to a man: that is, presumably assigns to him a definite [[क्षेत्र|Kṣetra]] for his own, probably measured out as recorded in Rv. i. 110, 5.</ref> It is a fair conclusion from the evidence that the system of separate holdings already existed in early Vedic times.^8 See also '''[[उर्वरा|Urvarā]], Khilya.'''

क्षेत्रिय
<u>'''Kṣetriya'''</u> is a disease which is mentioned several times in the Atharvaveda, and against which three hymns are specially directed.<ref name=fx1_ve1_807> ii. 8. 10;<br> iii. 7. ''Cf.'' ii. 14, 5;<br> iv. 18, 7.</ref> It is also mentioned in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_807> xv. 1.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_807> ii. 5, 6, 1-3, where the form is Kṣetrī, explained as a demon causing illness, merely an incorrect version of Av. iii. 10.</ref> The commentators on the Atharvaveda agree in taking it to be a hereditary disease. The word may mean ‘organic,’<ref name=fx4_ve1_807> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> or possibly ‘produced in the field,’ as a theory of its origin. What disease is really intended is quite uncertain. Weber<ref name=fx5_ve1_807> ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 145;<br> 13, 150 ''et seq.:'' 17, 208;<br> ''Naxatra,'' 2, 292.</ref> considered that the aim of the [[अथर्वन्|Atharvan]] hymns was to drive away injury threatening the fields, but this is improbable. Bloomfield<ref name=fx6_ve1_807> ''Atharvaveda,'' 60.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 286 ''et seq.;<br>'' Whitney, Transiation of the Atharvaveda, 48, 49;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 391, 392;<br> Speijer, ''De ceremonia apud Indos quœ jātakarma vocatur,'' 76-83;<br> Pāṇini, v. 2, 92, with the Kāśikā Vṛtti.</ref> suggests ‘scrofula’ or ‘syphilis.’ The remedies mentioned throw no light on the symptoms. 

क्षेम-धृत्वन् पौण्डरीक
<u>'''Kṣema-dhṛtvan Pauṇḍarīka'''</u> (‘descendant of Puṇḍarīka’) is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_808> xxii. 18, 7. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 32. Later, the name is Kṣema-[[धन्वन्|dhanvan]], Harivaṃśa, 824, etc.</ref> as having sacrificed on the bank of the river '''[[सुदामन्|Sudāman]].'''

क्षैमि
<u>'''Kṣaimi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Kṣema,’ is the patronymic of '''Sudakṣiṇa''' in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 6, 3; 7, 1, etc.; 8, 6).<br>==Foot Notes==

क्षोणी
<u>'''Kṣoṇī.'''</u>--This word, when used in the plural, denotes, according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary and Ludwig,<ref name=fx1_ve1_810>Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 247.</ref> in several passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_810> i. 57, 4;<br> 173, 7;<br> viii. 3, 10;<br> 13, 17;<br> x. 95. 19. In ii. 34, 13;<br> x. 22, 9, the sense is doubtful.</ref> the free retainers of the king. Geldner<ref name=fx3_ve1_810> Bezzenberger, ''Beiträge,'' 11, 327.</ref> at one time thought it referred to the wives of the king, pointing to polygamy; but later<ref name=fx4_ve1_810> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 279, 283.</ref> he concluded that it means certain divine wives.

क्षौम
<u>'''Kṣauma,'''</u> ‘a linen garment,’ is mentioned in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (iii. 6, 7, etc.) and in the Sūtras.<br>==Foot Notes==

क्ष्विङ्का
<u>'''Kṣviṅkā'''</u> is mentioned once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_812> x. 87, 7.</ref> as a bird of '''prey.''' The word also occurs in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or horse sacrifice, in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve1_812> v. 5, 15, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 93.</ref> where the commentary absurdly explains it as ‘a red-mouthed female ape’ (''rakta-mukhī vānarī''). 

ख
<u>'''Kha'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_813> Rv. viii. 77, 3;<br> 91, 7;<br> x. 156, 3, where only the Kha is referred to.<br><br>''Cf.'' the adjective ''[[सु-ख|su-kha]],'' ‘having a good axle-hole,’ ‘running easily’;<br> later, ‘agreeable.’</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_813> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 12, 1 (Mādhyaṃdina;<br> v. 10, 1 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> the hole in the nave of the wheel in which the axle is inserted. There was a difference, it seems, in the size of the hole in the wheel of a cart ('''Anas''') and of a chariot ('''[[रथ|Ratha]]''').<ref name=fx3_ve1_813> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], 1, 3, 6;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 333.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 247.</ref> See also 1. '''Yuga.'''

खङ्ग
<u>'''Khaṅga.'''</u> See '''[[खड्ग|Khaḍga]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

खड्ग
<u>'''Khaḍga'''</u> is the reading in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_815> iii. 14, 21.</ref> of the name of an animal which, in the text of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve1_815> xxiv. 40.</ref> variously appears as [[खङ्ग|Khaṅga]] and [[खड्ग|Khaḍga]]. The rhinoceros seems clearly to be meant.<ref name=fx3_ve1_815> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 86.</ref> In the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_815> xiv. 33, 26 (''khāḍga-[[कवच|kavaca]] aśvaratha'')</ref> a rhinoceros hide is mentioned as the covering of a chariot.

खण्डिक औद्भारि
<u>'''Khaṇḍika Audbhāri'''</u> (‘descendant of Udbhāra’) is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_816> xi. 8, 4, 1.</ref> as a teacher of '''[[केशिन्|Keśin]],''' and in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_816> i. 4, 12, where [[षण्डिक|Ṣaṇḍika]] is the reading of the MSS.</ref> as having been defeated by [[केशिन्|Keśin]] as a sacrificer. A Khāṇḍika appears in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_816> Caland, ''Über das rituelle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 20.</ref> as an enemy of [[केशिन्|Keśin]].

खदिर
<u>'''Khadira'''</u> is mentioned frequently from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_817> iii. 53, 19.</ref> onwards<ref name=fx2_ve1_817> Av. iii. 6, 1;<br> v. 5, 5;<br> viii. 8, 3;<br> x. 6, 6;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 9, 3, etc. So ''khādira,'' ‘made of [[खदिर|Khadira]] wood,’ [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 5, 7, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 3, 20;<br> iii. 6, 2, 12 etc.</ref> as a tree with hard wood<ref name=fx3_ve1_817> Av. x. 6, 6.</ref> --the ''Acacia catechu.'' The '''[[अश्वत्थ|Aśvattha]]''' is referred to as engrafting itself upon it in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx4_ve1_817> iii. 6, 1. ''Cf.'' viii. 8, 3.</ref>  and from it the climbing plant '''[[अरुन्धती|Arundhatī]]''' is said to have sprung.<ref name=fx5_ve1_817> Av. v. 5. 5.</ref> The ''[[स्रुव|sruva]]'' or sacrificial ladle is spoken of as having been made from it,<ref name=fx6_ve1_817> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 5, 7, 1.</ref> no doubt because of its hardness. It is in the same passage also said to have sprung from the sap (''rasa'') of the Gāyatrī. There is no clear reference to Catechu having been prepared from its core,<ref name=fx7_ve1_817> It is called ''bahu-sāra,'' ‘of great strength,’ in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 4, 9.</ref> as it was later. The core (''sāra'') was used for making amulets.<ref name=fx8_ve1_817> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 8.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 58, 58.</ref>

ख-द्योत
<u>'''Kha-dyota'''</u> (‘sky-illuminator’), ‘the firefly,’ is mentioned in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 7, 3. 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

खनित्र
<u>'''Khanitra,'''</u> a ‘shovel’ or ‘spade’ for digging, is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_819> i. 179, 6 (possibly metaphorical: see Oldenberg. ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 172;<br> the passage is obscure).</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_819> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 2, 4, etc.</ref>

खनित्रिम
<u>'''Khanitrima,'''</u> ‘produced by digging,’ as an epithet of ''āpaḥ,'' ‘waters,’ clearly refers to artificial water channels used for irrigation, as practised in the times of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_820> vii. 49, 2.</ref> and the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_820> i. 6, 4;<br> xix. 2, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 236;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 466.</ref>

खर
<u>'''Khara,'''</u> ‘ass,’ is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx1_ve1_821> iii. 2, 4.</ref> where a team of asses is alluded to. Probably the passages in the Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_821> v. 1, 2, 15;<br> xiv. 1, 2, 17;<br> 2, 2, 30.</ref> where the word is used to denote an earth mound on which the sacrificial vessels were placed, presuppose the sense of ‘ass,’ the mound being shaped in this form.<ref name=fx3_ve1_821> ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> 

खर्गला
<u>'''Khargalā'''</u> is an ‘owl’ or other nocturnal bird mentioned in one passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_822> vii. 104, 17. ''Cf.'' [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 107;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 93.</ref>

खर्जूर
<u>'''Kharjūra'''</u> is the name of a tree (''Phœnix silvestris'') which is mentioned in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_823> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 9, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 10;<br> xxxvi. 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 63.</ref>

खल
<u>'''Khala,'''</u> the ‘threshing-floor,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_824> x. 48, 7;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 10.</ref> and the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_824> xi. 3, 9;<br> ''[[खल|khala]]-ja,'' ‘produced on a threshing-floor,’ viii. 6, 15;<br> ''khalya,'' ‘being on a threshing-floor,’ Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 238.</ref> See '''[[कृषि|Kṛṣi]].'''

खल-कुल
<u>'''Khala-kula'''</u> is a word occurring in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_825> vi. 3. 22 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 3, 13 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]). ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien'' 1, 355.</ref> where Sāyaṇa glosses it by Kulattha, a kind of pulse (''Dolichos uniflorus'').

खल्व
<u>'''Khalva'''</u> is some sort of grain or leguminous plant, perhaps, as Weber<ref name=fx1_ve1_826> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 355.</ref> thinks, the ''Phaselus radiatus.'' It is mentioned with other grains of all sorts in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve1_826> xviii. 12, where Mahīdhara glosses it by ''caṇaka,'' ‘chick-pea.’</ref> and as being crushed with the '''[[दृषद्|Dṛṣad]]''' in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx3_ve1_826> ii. 31. 1;<br> v. 23, 8.</ref> It occurs also in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx4_ve1_826> vi. 3. 22 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 3, 13 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 241.</ref> where Śaṅkara glosses it with ''niṣpāva.''

खाण्डव
<u>'''Khāṇḍava'''</u> is mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx1_ve1_827> v. 1, 1.</ref> as one of the boundaries of '''[[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]].''' There seems no reason to doubt its identity with the famous [[खाण्डव|Khāṇḍava]] forest of the Mahābhārata. The name occurs also in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_827> xxv. 3, 6.</ref> and the Śāṭyāyanaka.<ref name=fx3_ve1_827> Max Müller, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' ^2 iv. ci.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 78.</ref> 

खादि
<u>'''Khādi'''</u> occurs frequently in the Rigveda denoting either anklets<ref name=fx1_ve1_828> v. 54, 11, and perhaps 53, 4.</ref> or armlets,<ref name=fx2_ve1_828> This is what Khādis on the shoulders must mean, i. 166, 9;<br> vii. 56, 13.</ref> or sometimes rings on the hands.<ref name=fx3_ve1_828> i. 168, 3;<br> ''[[खादि|khādi]]-[[हस्त|hasta]],'' ‘with rings on the hands,’ 5, 58, 2. So Roth takes Khādin in vi. 16, 40;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' Khādin occurs also in ii. 34, 2;<br> x. 38, 1.</ref> Max Müller<ref name=fx4_ve1_828> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 120, 230.</ref> considers that the word means quoits, the later [[चक्र|Cakra]].<ref name=fx5_ve1_828> ''Cf. [[वृष-खादि|vṛṣa-khādi]],'' Rv. i. 64, 10.</ref> The rings were sometimes of gold.<ref name=fx6_ve1_828> ''[[हिरण्य|Hiraṇya]]-[[खादि|khādi]],'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śranta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 5, 12;<br> viii. 23, 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 262;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 149.</ref>

खारी
<u>'''Khārī'''</u> designates a measure of Soma in one passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_829> iv. 32, 17. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 280.</ref>

खार्गलि
<u>'''Khārgali,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[खर्गला|Khargalā]] or [[खृगल|Khṛgala]],’ is the metronymic or patronymic of Luśākapi.<ref name=fx1_ve1_830> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxx. 2;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 4, 3.</ref>

खिल
<u>'''1. Khila,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_831> Av. vii. 115, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 3, 4, 1.</ref> '''Khilya'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_831> Rv. vi. 28, 2;<br> x. 142, 3.</ref> appear to have the same meaning. According to Roth,<ref name=fx3_ve1_831> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' So Whitney on Av., ''loc. cit.''</ref> these terms denote the waste land lying between cultivated fields; but he admits that this sense does not suit the passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_831> vi. 28, 2.</ref> in which it is said that the god places the worshipper on an unbroken Khilya (''abhinne khilye''), and he accordingly conjectures the reading ''akhilyabhinne,'' ‘land unbroken by barren strips.’ Pischel<ref name=fx5_ve1_831> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 205.</ref> thinks that the meaning intended is broad lands, which were used for the pasturing of the cattle of the community, and were not broken up by cultivated fields. Oldenberg,<ref name=fx6_ve1_831> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 385, 386.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 236;<br> Ludwig. Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 499;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiutic Society,'' 1910, 228.</ref> however, points out that the sense is rather the land which lay between cultivated fields, but which need not be deemed to have been unfertile, as Roth thought. This agrees with the fact that in Vedic times separate fields were already known: see '''[[क्षेत्र|Kṣetra]].''' 

खिल
<u>'''2. Khila'''</u> as a designation of certain hymns appended to the received text of the Rigveda occurs only in the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] period.<ref name=fx1_ve1_832> See Scheftelowitz, ''Die Apokryphen des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 16 ''et seq.''</ref> The term is a metaphorical application of the preceding word, ‘a space not filled up,’ ‘a supplement.’

खृगल
<u>'''Khṛgala,'''</u> or, as the Paippalāda recension of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_833> iii. 9. 3.</ref> has it, Khugila, is an obscure expression found in two passages only--once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_833> ii. 39, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 340;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 98.</ref> and once in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_833/> In the former the meaning ‘crutch’ seems required; in the latter Sāyaṇa glosses it by ‘armour’ (''tanu-trāṇa''), but the sense is quite uncertain.

खेल
<u>'''Khela'''</u> occurs in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_834> i. 116, 15.</ref> where Pischel<ref name=fx2_ve1_834> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 171-173.</ref> considers that a god, Vivasvant, is meant, and that races were run in his honour, explaining thus the phrase ''ājā khelasya,'' as ‘in the race of [[खेल|Khela]].’ Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_834> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> thinks that a man is meant, and Sieg,<ref name=fx4_ve1_834> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 127, 128.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 4. 28.</ref> following Sāyaṇa, sees in him a king whose [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] was [[अगस्त्य|Agastya]]. See also '''[[अंशु|Aṃśu]].'''

गङ्गा
<u>'''Gaṅgā,'''</u> the modern Ganges, is mentioned directly in the Rigveda only once, in the [[नदी|Nadī]]-[[स्तुति|stuti]] or ‘Praise of Rivers.’<ref name=fx1_ve1_835> x. 75, 5.</ref> But it is also referred to in the derivative form ''gāṅgyaḥ'' as an epithet of '''[[उरुकक्ष|Urukakṣa]].'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_835> The reference to the [[गङ्गा|Gaṅgā]] remains, even if with Oldenberg (''ṚgvedaNoten,'' 1, 396) we assume that a thicket i meant, and not a proper name (''cf.'' Wackernagel, ''Altindische Grammatik,'' 2, 288). See also Weber, Proceedings of the Berlin Academy, 1898, 563, n. 1.</ref> The name of this river does not occur<br><br><ref name=fx2_ve1_835> vi. 45, 31.</ref>  in the other Saṃhitā, but appears in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx4_ve1_835> xiii. 5, 4, 11. The victory on the [[गङ्गा|Gaṅgā]] represents the farthest extent of [[भरत|Bharata]] or Kuru rule. ''Cf.'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 23, and a verse in the Vaitāna [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxxiv. 9, where the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] is also referred to.</ref> where victories of '''[[भरत|Bharata]] [[दौःषन्ति|Dauḥṣanti]]''' on both [[गङ्गा|Gaṅgā]] and '''[[यमुना|Yamunā]]''' are referred to, and in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx5_ve1_835> ii. 20.</ref> especial honour is assigned to those who dwell between the [[गङ्गा|Gaṅgā]] and the [[यमुना|Yamunā]], this being. To doubt, the region in which that text originated. The identification of the [[गङ्गा|Gaṅgā]] with the Apayā<ref name=fx6_ve1_835> Rv. iii. 23, 4.</ref> made by Ludwig<ref name=fx7_ve1_835> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 200.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 4. 5.</ref> must be rejected: see '''[[आपया|Āpayā]].'''

गज
<u>'''Gaja,'''</u> the common name of the elephant in Epic<ref name=fx1_ve1_836> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 265, 269.</ref> and later Sanskrit, is only found in the late Adbhuta [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_836> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 39.</ref> See '''[[हस्तिन्|Hastin]].'''

गणक
<u>'''Gaṇaka,'''</u> ‘an astrologer,’ occurs in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha, or human sacrifice, in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_837> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 20;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 15, 1. ''Cf.'' Weber. ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 78.</ref> See also [[नक्षत्रदर्श|Nakṣatradarśa]].

गन्धर्वायण बालेय
<u>'''Gandharvāyaṇa Bāleya'''</u> (‘descendant of Bali’) '''[[आग्निवेश्य|Āgniveśya]]''' is mentioned as a [[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]] in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xx. 25).<br>==Foot Notes==

गन्धार
<u>'''Gandhāra'''</u> is a later form of the name of the people called '''[[गन्धारि|Gandhāri]]''' in the Rigveda and Atharvaveda. In the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_839> vi. 14, 1. 2. See Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 399, n.;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 219, n. On the other hand, Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 15. 106, thought the passage meant that the Gandhāras were near the writer.</ref> the Gandhāras are referred to as being distant from the writer. See also '''[[गान्धार|Gāndhāra]].''' 

गन्धारि
<u>'''Gandhāri'''</u> is the name of a people in the north-west of India. In the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_840> i. 126, 7.</ref> the good wool of the sheep of the Gandhāris is referred to. The Gandhāris are also mentioned with the '''Mūjavants, Angas,''' and '''Magadhas''' in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_840> v. 22, 14. The latter two tribes are apparently the Eastern limit of the poet's knowledge, the two former the Northern.</ref> Gandhāris<ref name=fx3_ve1_840> Hiraṇyakeśi Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvii. 6;<br> Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxii. 6, 18.</ref> or Gāndhāris<ref name=fx4_ve1_840> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxi. 13.</ref> are also spoken of in the Śrauta Sūtras.<ref name=fx5_ve1_840> See Caland, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 56, 553.</ref> Zimmer<ref name=fx6_ve1_840> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 30, 31.</ref> considers that they were settled in Vedic times on the south bank of the '''[[कुभा|Kubhā]]''' up to its mouth in the Indus, and for some distance down the east side of the Indus itself. They later formed a portion of the Persian empire, and detachments of Gandarians accompanied Xerxes in his expedition against Greece.<ref name=fx7_ve1_840> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 23.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 206.</ref>

गभस्ति
<u>'''Gabhasti'''</u> denotes, according to Roth,<ref name=fx1_ve1_841> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> the pole of a chariot in the epithet ''[[स्यूम-गभस्ति|syūma-gabhasti]],'' ‘having reins as a pole,’ used of the car of the gods in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_841> i. 122, 5;<br> vii. 71, 3.</ref> and independently in the plural in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_841> ii. 7, 13, 4.</ref> The meaning is, however, doubtful.<ref name=fx4_ve1_841> See Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 55.</ref> Roth<ref name=fx5_ve1_841> ''Op. cit., s.v.''</ref> himself suggests that ''[[स्यूम-गभस्ति|syūma-gabhasti]]'' may refer to a sort of double reins.

गय
<u>'''1. Gaya,'''</u> ‘house,’ is a common word in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_842> i. 74, 2;<br> v. 10, 3;<br> 44, 7;<br> vi. 2, 8, etc.</ref> and sometimes occurs later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_842> Av. vi. 3, 3;<br> 84, 1;<br> '''Vājasaneyi''' Saṃhitā, xxvii. 3.</ref> As its sense includes the inmates as well as their belongings, it is equivalent to ‘household.’

गय प्लात
<u>'''2. Gaya Plāta'''</u> (‘son of Plati’) is referred to in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_843> x. 63, 17;<br> 64, 17 (as son of [[प्लति|Plati]]).</ref> two hymns of which he clearly claims to have composed, and which are attributed to him in the Sarvānukramaṇī and the  [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_843> v. 2.</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_843> i. 14, 4. ''Cf.'' also the [[खिल|Khila]] after Rv. v. 51, 15;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 214.</ref> he appears with [[असित|Asita]] and [[कश्यप|Kaśyapa]] as a half-mythical magician.<ref name=fx4_ve1_843> Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 17, 403.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 133;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 460.</ref>

गर
<u>'''1. Gara,'''</u> ‘poison,’ is referred to in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_844> v. 18, 13. ''Cf. gara'' alone, [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xix. 4, 2 (see ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 33);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 9, 10;<br> ''gara-gir,'' ‘poisoned,’ [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 1, 9;<br> xix. 4, 2. 10.</ref> in the compound ''gara-gīrṇa,'' ‘poisoned.’ In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_844> xi. 5, 8, 6.</ref> it means simply a ‘fluid.’

गर
<u>'''2. Gara'''</u> is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_845> ix. 2, 16. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 52.</ref> as the author of a Sāman or Chant, and as a friend of Indra.

गर्ग
<u>'''Garga'''</u> is the name of a sage who is not mentioned in any of the Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve1_846> The authorship of Rv. vi. 47 is attributed to [[गर्ग|Garga]] [[भारद्वाज|Bhāradvāja]] in the Anukramaṇī.</ref> but his descendants, the ''Gargāḥ Prāvareyāḥ,'' are referred to in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve1_846> xiii. 12. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 374.</ref> [[गर्ग|Garga]] himself does not occur till the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] period.<ref name=fx3_ve1_846> [[गर्ग|Garga]]-trirātra, [[गर्ग|Garga]]-tryaha, a three-night or three-day feast of [[गर्ग|Garga]]. See Āśvalāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 2;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 22. 2;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxiii. 2, 8.</ref>

गर्गर
<u>'''Gargara,'''</u> apparently the designation of a musical instrument, is mentioned once in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_847> viii. 69, 9. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 144, n. 1;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 289.</ref>

गर्त
<u>'''Garta'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_848> vi. 20, 9. Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 246, 247. Zimmer wrongly takes this passage to refer to standing in the car. See Hopkins. ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 238, 239;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 48, and ''cf. [[गर्त|garta]]-sad,'' ‘sitting on the car seat,’ in Rv. ii. 33. 11.</ref> primarily denotes the seat of the chariot on which the archer sat. It seems to have been of considerable  size, being described as ''bṛhant,''<ref name=fx2_ve1_848> v. 62, 8;<br> 68, 5.</ref> ‘large.’ The word then comes to denote the chariot<ref name=fx3_ve1_848> So probably in v. 62, 5;<br> ''gartā-ruh,'' ‘mounting the chariot,’ in Rv. i. 124, 7;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 5, may refer merely to mounting the seat. The passage is obscure;<br> see Geldner, ''Rigveda, Kommentar,'' 22.</ref> itself, either really or metaphorically.<ref name=fx4_ve1_848> vii. 64, 4 (of the hymn).</ref>

गर्दभ
<u>'''Gardabha,'''</u> ‘the ass,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_849> iii. 53, 23. A car drawn by asses is referred to in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 9;<br> see also '''[[खर|Khara]].'''</ref> as inferior to the horse. In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā he again appears as inferior to the horse,<ref name=fx2_ve1_849> v. 1, 2, 1. 2.</ref> but at the same time as the best bearer of burdens (''bhāra-bhāritama'') among animals.<ref name=fx3_ve1_849> v. 1, 5, 5.</ref> The same authority styles the ass ''[[द्वि-रेतस्|dvi-retas]],'' ‘having double seed,’<ref name=fx4_ve1_849> v. 1, 5, 5;<br> vii. 1, 1, 2;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 57, 4 (Oertel, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 177-180): of the [[रासभ|Rāsabha]], Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 3, 1, 23.</ref> in allusion to his breeding with the mare as well as the she-ass. The smallness of the young of the ass, and his capacity for eating, are both referred to.<ref name=fx5_ve1_849> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 5, 5.</ref> The disagreeable cry of the animal is mentioned in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx6_ve1_849> viii. 6, 10.</ref> and in allusion to this the term ‘ass’ is applied opprobriously to a singer in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx7_ve1_849> i. 29, 5.</ref> A hundred asses are spoken of as a gift to a singer in a [[वालखिल्य|Vālakhilya]] hymn.<ref name=fx8_ve1_849> viii. 56, 3.</ref> The mule (''[[अश्वतर|aśvatara]]'') is the offspring of an ass and a mare, the latter, like the ass, being called ''[[द्विरेतस्|dviretas]],''<ref name=fx9_ve1_849> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 1, 2. 3;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 1, 6;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 57, 4.</ref> ‘receiving double seed,’ for similar reasons. The male ass is often also termed '''[[रासभ|Rāsabha]].''' The female ass, Gardabhī, is mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx10_ve1_849> x. 1, 4.</ref> and the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx11_ve1_849> i. 4, 8. For other references to the ass as [[गर्दभ|Gardabha]], see Av. v. 31, 3;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 34;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 5, 1, 9;<br> xii. 7, 1, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 232, 233.</ref>

गर्दभी-मुख
<u>'''Gardabhī-mukha'''</u> is mentioned as a teacher in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_850> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 384.</ref> 

गर्दभी-विपीत
<u>'''Gardabhī-vipīta,'''</u> or '''Gardabhī-vibhīta,''' is the name of a teacher who was a [[भारद्वाज|Bhāradvāja]] and a contemporary of '''[[जनक|Janaka]],''' mentioned in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].(**  1) iv. 1, 11 (Mādhyaṃdina = iv. 1, 5 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).<br>==Foot Notes==

गर्मुत्
<u>'''Garmut'''</u> is the name of a kind of wild bean mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_852> ii. 4, 4, 1. 2.</ref> The [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_852> x. 11.</ref> has the form Ganmut, which is probably a false reading. The adjective ''gārmuta,'' ‘made from the [[गर्मुत्|Garmut]] bean,’ is found in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx3_ve1_852> ii. 2, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 71.</ref>

गलुन्त
<u>'''Galunta'''</u> is a word occurring only once in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_853> vi. 83, 3.</ref> apparently in the sense of ‘swelling,’<ref name=fx2_ve1_853> Bloomfield, ''Proceedings of the American Oriental Society,'' October, 1887, xvi;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 505.</ref> but Whitney<ref name=fx3_ve1_853> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 343.</ref> translates it by ‘neck.’

गलूनस आर्क्षाकायण
<u>'''Galūnasa Ārkṣākāyaṇa'''</u> (‘descendant of Ṛkṣāka’) is mentioned as a teacher in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 38, 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

गवय
<u>'''Gavaya,'''</u> the name of a species of ox (''Bos gavacus'') occurs frequently from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_855> iv. 21, 8.</ref> onwards.<ref name=fx2_ve1_855> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 10;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvi. 17;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 28;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 8;<br> iii. 34;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 3, 9;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 3, 14, etc.</ref> It is mentioned with '''[[गौर|Gaura]]''' and '''[[महिष|Mahiṣa]]''' in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx3_ve1_855> xxiv. 28.</ref> where also a wild [[गवय|Gavaya]] is spoken of.<ref name=fx4_ve1_855> xiii. 49;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Samhitā, iv. 2, 10, 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 7, 17;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvi. 17.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 83, 84.</ref>

गवाशिर्
<u>'''Gavāśir,'''</u> ‘mixed with milk,’ is a frequent epithet of '''Soma''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_856> i. 137, 1;<br> 187, 9;<br> ii. 41, 3;<br> iii. 32, 2;<br> 42, 1. 7;<br> viii. 52, 10;<br> 101, 10. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 279.</ref> 

गव्-इष्टि
<u>'''Gav-iṣṭi'''</u> (lit. ‘desire of cows’) in several passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_857> i. 91, 23;<br> iii. 47, 4;<br> v. 63, 5;<br> vi. 31, 3;<br> 47, 20;<br> 59, 7;<br> viii. 24, 2;<br> ix. 76, 2. So Av. iv. 24, 5.</ref> denotes ‘conflict’ or ‘battle,’ evidently with reference to cattle raids. [[गव्या|Gavyā]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_857> Rv. vii. 18, 7.</ref> is similarly used.

गवि-ष्ठिर आत्रेय
<u>'''Gavi-ṣṭhira Ātreya'''</u> (‘descendant of '''Atri'''’) is mentioned as a '''[[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]],''' or seer, in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_858> v. 1, 12;<br> x. 150, 5.</ref> and the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_858> iv. 29, 5. See also Āśvalāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 14. 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 126.</ref>

गवीधुका
<u>'''Gavīdhukā,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_859> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 4, 3, 2.</ref> '''Gavedhukā,'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_859> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2, 4, 13;<br> 3, 1, 10;<br> xiv. 1, 2, 19.</ref> is the name of a species of grass (''Coix barbata''). It is also referred to in the adjectival forms ''gāvīdhuka''<ref name=fx3_ve1_859> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 7, 1;<br> 9, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 3, 6;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 5;<br> iv. 3, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xv. 5.</ref> and ''gāvedhuka.''<ref name=fx4_ve1_859> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2, 4, 11. 13;<br> 3, 1, 10;<br> 3, 7.</ref> It was boiled with rice<ref name=fx5_ve1_859> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 4, 3, 2.</ref> (''gavīdhukāyavāgā'') or barley<ref name=fx6_ve1_859> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 1, 1, 8.</ref> (''gavedhukā-saktavaḥ'') in preparing gruel.

गव्य
<u>'''Gavya.'''</u> See '''[[गव्यूति|Gavyūti]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

गव्या
<u>'''Gavyā.'''</u> See '''[[गव्इष्टि|Gaviṣṭi]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

गव्यूति
<u>'''Gavyūti'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_862> i. 25, 16;<br> iii. 62, 16;<br> v. 66, 3;<br> vii. 77, 4, etc.</ref> means, according to Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve1_862> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> grass land for the pasturing of cattle, in which sense [[गव्य|Gavya]] is also found.<ref name=fx3_ve1_862> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 28;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 3b.</ref> Thence it derives the sense of a measure of distance found in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_862> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 13, 12.</ref> Geldner, on the other hand, takes the original meaning to be ‘road,’ real<ref name=fx6_ve1_862> Rv. i. 25, 16.</ref> or metaphorical,<ref name=fx7_ve1_862> Rv. vi. 47, 20;<br> x. 14, 2.</ref> thence a measure of distance,<ref name=fx8_ve1_862> Rv. viii. 60, 20, and n. 4.</ref> and finally ‘land.’<ref name=fx9_ve1_862> Rv. iii. 62, 16;<br> vii. 62, 5;<br> 65, 4;<br> viii. 5, 6.</ref>(**  5) ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 290, 291. 

गाङ्ग्य
<u>'''Gāṅgya,'''</u> ‘being on the Ganges,’ is the epithet of '''[[उरुकक्ष|Urukakṣa]]'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_863> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Cf.'' Wackernagel, ''Altindische Grammatik,'' 2, 288;<br> Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 28.</ref> or of a thicket<ref name=fx2_ve1_863> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 398.</ref> in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx3_ve1_863> vi. 45, 31.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 2, 291, n.</ref>

गाङ्ग्यायनि
<u>'''Gāṅgyāyani,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[गाङ्ग्य|Gāṅgya]],’ occurs as the patronymic of '''[[चित्र|Citra]]''' in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_864> i. 1. There is a ''v.l.'' [[गार्ग्यायणि|Gārgyāyaṇi]]. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 395.</ref>

गातु
<u>'''Gātu.'''</u> See '''[[गाथा|Gāthā]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

गाथा
<u>'''Gāthā'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_866> viii. 32, 1;<br> 71, 14;<br> 98, 9;<br> ix. 99, 4;<br> ''gātha,'' i. 167, 6;<br> ix. 11, 4;<br> ''gātha-pati,'' ‘lord of song,’ i. 43, 4;<br> ''[[गाथा|gāthā]]-nī,'' ‘leading a song,’ i. 190, 1;<br> viii. 92, 2;<br> ''ṛjugātha,'' ‘singing correctly,’ v. 44, 5;<br> ''[[गाथिन्|gāthin]],'' ‘singer,’ i. 7, 1. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 65.</ref> usually means only ‘song,’ ‘verse,’ like [[गातु|Gātu]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_866> i. 151, 2;<br> ii. 20, 5;<br> iii. 4, 4;<br> iv. 4, 6;<br> v. 87, 8;<br> x. 20, 4;<br> 122, 2.</ref> In one passage,<ref name=fx3_ve1_866> x. 85, 6.</ref> however, it already has a more special sense, as it is classed with '''[[नाराशंसी|Nārāśaṃsī]]''' and '''[[रैभी|Raibhī]],''' a collocation repeatedly found later.<ref name=fx4_ve1_866> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 11, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], v. 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 32;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxx. 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 6, 8, where [[रैभी|Raibhī]] does not occur;<br> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 12.</ref> The commentators identify the three terms with certain verses of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx5_ve1_866> Viz., [[गाथा|Gāthā]] = Av. xx. 127, 12 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[नाराशंसी|Nārāśaṃsī]] = Av. xx. 127, 1-3;<br> [[रैभी|Raibhī]] = Av. xx. 127, 4-6;<br> while ''ibid.,'' 7-10, are known as Pārikṣityaḥ (''scil., ṛcaḥ'').</ref> but Oldenberg<ref name=fx6_ve1_866> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 238. Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 689 ''et seq.,'' seems to accept the identification even for the Rigveda.</ref> has shown that this identification is incorrect for the Rigveda. Gāthās are often mentioned elsewhere,<ref name=fx7_ve1_866> Av. x. 10, 20;<br> xv. 6, 4 (distinct from [[नाराशंसी|Nārāśaṃsī]]);<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 4, 16;<br> xi. 5, 7, 10;<br> xiii. 1, 5, 6;<br> 4, 2, 8;<br> 5, 4, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 10 (distinct from [[नाराशंसी|Nārāśaṃsī]]);<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 17, 9, etc.</ref> and are referred to as metrical in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx8_ve1_866> ii. 3, 6, with Keith's note;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 7, 10.</ref> where the '''Ṛc, [[कुम्ब्या|Kumbyā]],''' and [[गाथा|Gāthā]] are classed as forms of verse. The [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx9_ve1_866> vii. 18. The story of [[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]] is described as ''śata-gātham,'' ‘told in a hundred Gāthās.’</ref> distinguishes between Ṛc and [[गाथा|Gāthā]] as divine and human respectively. According to the usage of the  Brāhmaṇas and the liturgical literature, as stated by the St. Petersburg Dictionary, the Gāthās are, though religious in content, distinguished from Ṛc, [[यजुस्|Yajus]], and Sāman as nonVedic--that is, are not Mantras. This view is consistent with the fact that the phrase '''[[यज्ञ-गाथा|Yajña-gāthā]],''' meaning a verse summarizing a sacrificial usage, is not rare. The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx10_ve1_866> xiii. 5, 4, etc., and see xiii. 4, 2, 8, where the Gāthās are plainly Dānastutis, or ‘praises of gifts,’ just as the [[नाराशंसी|Nārāśaṃsī]] verses are declared to be in the Bṛhaddevatā, iii. 154.</ref> preserves several Gāthās, which generally accord with this description as epitomizing the sacrifices of famous kings, and the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx11_ve1_866> iii. 7, 3.</ref> states that a [[गाथा|Gāthā]] is sung at a wedding. Sometimes<ref name=fx12_ve1_866> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 2, 6. So Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 98, takes Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 6, 8, where Sāyaṇa hesitates between identifying the two and distinguishing them. It seems reasonable to regard [[गाथा|Gāthā]] as the wider term which covers, but is not coextensive with, [[नाराशंसी|Nārāśaṃsī]].<br><br>''Cf.'' Sāyaṇa's example of a [[गाथा|Gāthā]] in his commentary on [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 3, 6: ''prātaḥ [[प्रातर्|prātar]] anṛtaṃ te vadanti,'' ‘they every morning tell an untruth,’ which is clearly not a [[नाराशंसी|Nārāśaṃsī]].<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 689 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Episches im Vedischen Ritual,'' 4 ''et seq.;<br>'' Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 493.</ref> [[गाथा|Gāthā]] is qualified as [[नाराशंसी|Nārāśaṃsī]], where it must be a eulogy of a generous donor.

गाथिन्
<u>'''Gāthin'''</u> is mentioned as the son of '''[[कुशिक|Kuśika]]''' and father of '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]''' in the Sarvānukramaṇī. It is difficult to say whether this tradition is correct; it derives some support from the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 18), where reference is made to the divine lore (''[[दैव|daiva]] veda'') of the Gāthins, which is said to be shared by '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]]''' as a result of his adoption by '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]].''' See '''[[गाथिन|Gāthina]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

गाथिन
<u>'''Gāthina.'''</u>--The sons of [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] are described in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_868> vii. 18. ''Cf.'' Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vii. 18;<br> Weber, ''Episches im Vedischen Ritual,'' 16, n. 3.</ref> as Gāthinas, or descendants of [[गाथिन्|Gāthin]], who, according to tradition, was their grandfather;<ref name=fx2_ve1_868> ''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 348 ''et seq.;<br>'' Pargiter, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1910, 32 ''et seq.''</ref> and '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]''' himself is styled [[गाथिन|Gāthina]] in the Sarvānukramaṇī. 

गां-दम
<u>'''Gāṃ-dama'''</u> is the form in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_869> xxi. 14, 20.</ref> of the name of '''Ekayāvan,''' which in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_869> ii. 7, 11, 2. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transac tions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 69.</ref> is read as Kāṃdama.

गान्धार
<u>'''Gāndhāra,'''</u> ‘a king of Gandhāra’ named '''[[नग्नजित्|Nagnajit]],''' is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_870> vii. 34. in the list of teachers who handed down the knowledge of the substitute for Soma.</ref> In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_870> viii. 1, 4, 10.</ref> he or some descendant figures as '''[[स्वर्जित् नाग्नजित|Svarjit Nāgnajita]]''' or [[नग्नजित्|Nagnajit]], and as giving an opinion on the ritual, which is rejected with the observation that the author was merely a princely person (''[[राजन्य-बन्धु|rājanya-bandhu]]'').

गार्गी वाचक्नवी
<u>'''Gārgī Vācaknavī'''</u> is referred to in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_871> iii. 6, 1;<br> 8, 1. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 118.</ref> as a female contemporary and rival of '''[[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]].'''

गार्गी-पुत्र
<u>'''Gārgī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of Gargī,’ occurs as the name of three teachers in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 4, 30). The earliest of these three was the pupil of '''[[बाडेयीपुत्र|Bāḍeyīputra]]''' and the teacher of the second [[गार्गीपुत्र|Gārgīputra]]. The latter was the teacher of '''[[पाराशरीकौण्डिनीपुत्र|Pārāśarīkauṇḍinīputra]],''' the teacher of the third [[गार्गीपुत्र|Gārgīputra]].<br>==Foot Notes==

गार्ग्य
<u>'''Gārgya,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[गर्ग|Garga]],’ is the patronymic of '''[[बालाकि|Bālāki]]''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka<ref name=fx1_ve1_873> ii. 1, 1.</ref> and the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_873> iv. 1.</ref> Upaniṣads. Two Gārgyas are mentioned in the second [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]:<ref name=fx3_ve1_873> iv. 6, 2 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]])</ref> one of them is the pupil of [[गार्ग्य|Gārgya]], who again is the pupil of [[गौतम|Gautama]]. Others occur in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx4_ve1_873> i. 7, 3.</ref> and in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx5_ve1_873> i. 3. 12;<br> iii. 13.</ref> as well as later in the ritual Sūtras. Thus the family was evidently long connected with the development of liturgy and grammar. 

गार्ग्यायण
<u>'''Gārgyāyaṇa,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[गार्ग्य|Gārgya]],’ is mentioned as a pupil of '''[[उद्दालकायन|Uddālakāyana]]''' in the second [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iv. 6, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).<br>==Foot Notes==

गार्ग्यायणि
<u>'''Gārgyāyaṇi,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[गार्ग्य|Gārgya]],’ is a variant reading for '''[[गाङ्ग्यायनि|Gāṅgyāyani]]''' as the patronymic of '''[[चित्र|Citra]]''' in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (i. 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

गालव
<u>'''Gālava'''</u> is mentioned as a pupil of '''Vidarbhīkauṇḍinya''' in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_876> ii. 5, 22;<br> iv. 5, 28 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> It is possibly the same man that is referred to regarding a point of ritual in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx2_ve1_876> v. 3, 3.</ref> A grammarian of this name is mentioned in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_876> iv. 3. ''Cf.'' Pāṇini, vi. 3, 61;<br> vii. 1, 74;<br> 3, 99;<br> viii. 4, 67.</ref>

गिरि
<u>'''Giri,'''</u> ‘mountain’ or ‘height,’ is a word that occurs repeatedly in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_877> i. 56, 3;<br> 61, 14;<br> 63, 1;<br> iv. 20, 6;<br> vi. 24, 8, etc.</ref> Thus reference is made to the trees on the hills, hence called ‘tree-haired’ (''[[वृक्ष|vṛkṣa]]-keśāḥ''),<ref name=fx2_ve1_877> Rv. v. 41, 11.</ref> and to the streams proceeding from the hills to the sea (''[[सम्उद्र|samudra]]'').<ref name=fx3_ve1_877> Rv. vii. 95, 2.</ref> The term is frequently coupled with the adjectival ''[[पर्वत|parvata]].''<ref name=fx4_ve1_877> Rv. i. 56, 4;<br> viii. 64, 5;<br> Av. iv. 7, 8;<br> vi. 12, 3;<br> 17, 3;<br> ix. 1, 18, etc.</ref> The Rigveda mentions the waters from the hills,<ref name=fx5_ve1_877> Rv. vi. 66, 11, on which passage, see Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 411;<br> viii. 32, 4;<br> x. 68, 1, etc.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx6_ve1_877> xii. 1, 11. See '''[[हिमवन्त्|Himavant]].'''</ref> refers to the snowy mountains. Actual names of mountains, as '''[[मूजवन्त्|Mūjavant]], [[त्रिककुद्|Trikakud]], [[हिमवन्त्|Himavant]],''' are very rare. References to '''[[क्रौञ्च|Krauñca]], [[महामेरु|Mahāmeru]],''' and '''Maināga,''' are confined to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, while '''[[नावप्रभ्रंशन|Nāvaprabhraṃśana]]''' can no longer be considered a proper name.<ref name=fx7_ve1_877> Av. xix. 37, 8, with Whitney's note in his Translation;<br> Macdonell, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 1107.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 47.</ref>

गिरि-क्षित् औच्चा-मन्यव
<u>'''Giri-kṣit Auccā-manyava,'''</u> ‘descendant of Uccāmanyu,’ is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (x. 5, 7) as a contemporary of '''Abhipratārin Kākṣaseṇi''' <br>==Foot Notes==

गिरि-ज बाभ्रव्य
<u>'''Giri-ja Bābhravya,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[बभ्रु|Babhru]],’ is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 1) as having been taught by '''Śrauta''' the method of dividing the sacrificial animal (''paśor vibhakti'').<br>==Foot Notes==

गुग्गुलु
<u>'''Guggulu,'''</u> ‘bdellium,’ is referred to in one passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_880> xix. 38, 2.</ref> as produced by the [[सिन्धु|Sindhu]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_880> Or ‘from streams’ (''[[सैन्धव|saindhava]]''), as Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. [[गुग्गुलु|guggulu]],'' suggests.</ref> and by the sea. The latter source presumably alludes, as Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve1_880> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 28.</ref> assumes, to seaborne trade, bdellium being the gum of a tree, not a product of the sea. It is, however, possible that in this passage some other substance may be meant. The word in this form also occurs elsewhere in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_880> ii. 36, 7.</ref> and later;<ref name=fx5_ve1_880> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 28.</ref> it is often<ref name=fx6_ve1_880> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 8, 6;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 8, 5;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxiv. 13;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 2, 16.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 675;<br> Lassen, ''Indische Alterthumskunde,'' 12, 339;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 957, 958.</ref> mentioned in the older form of '''[[गुल्गुलु|Gulgulu]],''' between which and [[गुग्गुलु|Guggulu]] the manuscripts constantly vary

गुङ्गु
<u>'''Guṅgu.'''</u>--The descendants of [[गुङ्गु|Guṅgu]] are referred to as Guṅgus in a hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_881> x. 48, 8. ''Cf.'' Ludwig. Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 165.</ref> apparently as friends of '''[[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]].''' Possibly a people may be meant.

गुप्त
<u>'''Gupta'''</u> is the name in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 42) of '''[[वैपश्चित|Vaipaścita]] [[दार्ढजयन्ति|Dārḍhajayanti]] [[गुप्त|Gupta]] [[लौहित्य|Lauhitya]].''' All the three other names being patronymics show that he was descended from the families of Vipaścit, [[दृढजयन्त|Dṛḍhajayanta]], and [[लोहित|Lohita]].<br>==Foot Notes==

गुल्गुलु
<u>'''Gulgulu.'''</u> See '''[[गुग्गुलु|Guggulu]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

गृत्स-मद
<u>'''Gṛtsa-mada'''</u> is the name of a seer to whom the Sarvānukramaṇī attributes the authorship of the second Maṇḍala of the Rigveda. This tradition is supported by the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Brāh-  maṇa<ref name=fx1_ve1_884> v. 2, 4.</ref> and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Araṇyaka.<ref name=fx2_ve1_884> ii. 2, 1.</ref> The [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_884> xxii. 4. ''Cf.'' Gārtsamadī, xxviii. 2.</ref> speaks of him as a '''[[भार्गव|Bhārgava]],''' ‘descendant of [[भृगु|Bhṛgu]],’ with a variant '''[[बाभ्रव|Bābhrava]],''' ‘descendant of [[बभ्रु|Babhru]],’ but the later tradition keeps to the former patronymic.<ref name=fx4_ve1_884> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 226 ''et seq.''</ref> The Gṛtsamadas are often mentioned in the second Maṇḍala of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx5_ve1_884> ii. 4, 9;<br> 19, 8;<br> 39, 8;<br> 41, 18.</ref> and are also called Śunahotras,<ref name=fx6_ve1_884> ii. 18, 6;<br> 41, 14. 17.</ref> but never Gārtsamadas or Śaunahotras, and [[गृत्समद|Gṛtsamada]] himself never occurs there.<ref name=fx7_ve1_884> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 200, 201.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 118;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 287.</ref>

गृध्र
<u>'''Gṛdhra,'''</u> ‘the vulture,’ is often mentioned from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_885> i. 118, 4;<br> ii. 39, 1;<br> vii. 104, 22;<br> x. 123, 8.</ref> downwards.<ref name=fx2_ve1_885> Av. vii. 95, 1;<br> xi. 2, 2;<br> 9, 9;<br> 10. 8. 24;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 4, 7, 1;<br> v. 5, 20, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 9, 19;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iv. 29;<br> Adbhuta [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] in ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 40;<br> etc.</ref> The swiftness of its flight<ref name=fx3_ve1_885> Rv. ii. 39, 1.</ref> and its fondness for devouring carrion are especially noticed.<ref name=fx4_ve1_885> Av. xi. 10, 8. 24;<br> Maitrāyaṃ Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> More generally the word is used to designate any bird of prey, the eagle ('''[[श्येन|Śyena]]''') being classed as the chief of the Gṛdhras.<ref name=fx5_ve1_885> Rv. ix. 96, 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 88;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 225.</ref>

गृष्टि
<u>'''Gṛṣṭi,'''</u> ‘a young cow,’ which has only calved once, occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_886> iv. 18, 10.</ref> and the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_886> ii. 13, 3;<br> viii. 9, 24;<br> xix. 24, 5.</ref> as well as in the later [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] literature.<ref name=fx3_ve1_886> [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 19. 24, etc.</ref>

गृह
<u>'''Gṛha'''</u> is used in the singular,<ref name=fx1_ve1_887> Rv. iii. 53, 6;<br> iv. 49, 6;<br> viii. 10. 1, etc.;<br> Av. vii. 83, 1;<br> x. 6, 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 21.</ref> or oftener in the plural,<ref name=fx2_ve1_887> Rv. ii. 42, 3;<br> v. 76, 4;<br> x. 18, 12;<br> 85, 26;<br> 142, 4;<br> 165, 2;<br> Av. i. 27, 4;<br> iii. 10, 11;<br> vi. 137, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 31;<br> viii. 26;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ii. 32;<br> iv. 33;<br> xviii. 44;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 2, 22;<br> 6, 1, 19, etc.</ref> to denote the ‘house’ of the Vedic Indian. '''Dama''' or '''Dam''' has  the same sense, while '''[[पस्त्या|Pastyā]]''' and '''[[हर्म्य|Harmya]]''' denote more especially the home with its surroundings, the family settlement. The house held not only the family, which might be of considerable size, but also the cattle<ref name=fx3_ve1_887> Rv. vii. 56, 16;<br> Av. i. 3, 4;<br> ix. 3, 13.</ref> and the sheep<ref name=fx4_ve1_887> Rv. x. 106, 5;<br> Av. iii. 3.</ref> at night. It was composed of several rooms, as the use of the plural indicates, and it could be securely shut up.<ref name=fx5_ve1_887> Rv. vii. 85, 6.</ref> The door ('''[[द्वार्|Dvār]], Dvāra''') is often referred to, and from it the house is called '''[[दुरोण|Duroṇa]].''' In every house the fire was kept burning.<ref name=fx6_ve1_887> Rv. i. 69, 2. ''Cf.'' the Gārhapatya Agni, Av. v. 31, 5;<br> vi. 120, 1;<br> 121, 2;<br> viii. 102;<br> ix. 6, 30;<br> xii. 2, 34;<br> xviii. 4, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā. iii. 39;<br> xix. 18;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 6. 12;<br> Kauṣīt taki [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 6, 1, 28;<br> vii. 1, 1, 6, etc.</ref><br><br>Very little is known of the structure of the house. Presumably stone was not used,<ref name=fx7_ve1_887> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 153. Muir's view, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 461, that clay was used can only apply to the minor finishing of the walls of a house.</ref> and houses were, as in Megasthenes' time,<ref name=fx8_ve1_887> Arrian, ''Indica,'' x. 2.</ref> built of wood. The hymns of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx9_ve1_887> iii. 12;<br> ix. 3. See Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 343 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 234 ''et seq.;<br>'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 525 ''et seq.''</ref> give some information about the construction of a house, but the details are extremely obscure, for most of the expressions used do not recur in any context in which their sense is clear. According to Zimmer,<ref name=fx10_ve1_887> ''Op. cit.,'' 153. No certainty can attach to the rendering of the words.</ref> four pillars ('''[[उपमित्|Upamit]]''') were set up on a good site, and against them beams were leant at an angle as props ('''[[प्रतिमित्|Pratimit]]'''). The upright pillars were connected by cross beams ('''[[परिमित्|Parimit]]''') resting upon them. The roof was formed of ribs of bamboo cane (''[[वंश|vaṃśa]]''),<ref name=fx11_ve1_887> It seems likely that, as the ribs were of bamboo and were probably fixed in the ridge, the roof was wagon headed, like the huts of the Todas at the present day (see illustrations in Rivers, ''The Todas,'' pp. 25, 27, 28, 51), and the rock-cut Chaityas, or Assembly Halls, of the Buddhists in Western India, in some of the earliest of which the wooden ribs of the arched roof are still preserved. See Fergusson, ''History of Indian Architecture,'' 22, 135, ''cf.'' 126.</ref> a ridge called '''[[विषूवन्त्|Viṣūvant]],''' and a net ('''[[अक्षु|Akṣu]]'''), which may mean a thatched covering<ref name=fx12_ve1_887> Av. ix. 3, 8, where Bloomfield, ''op. cit.,'' 598, thinks of a wickerwork roof;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 136, of a pole with countless holes.</ref> over the bamboo ribs. The walls were filled up with grass in bundles (''[[पलद|palada]]''), and the whole structure was held together with ties of  various sorts (''nahana, prāṇāha, [[संदंश|saṃdaṃśa]], pariṣvañjalya'').<ref name=fx13_ve1_887> Av. ix. 3, 4. 5.</ref> In connexion with the house, mention is made of four terms which, though primarily sacrificial in meaning, seem to designate parts of the building: [[हविर्धान|Havirdhāna]], ‘oblation-holder’; [[अग्निशाल|Agniśāla]],<ref name=fx14_ve1_887> Zimmer conjecturally identifies the [[अग्निशाल|Agniśāla]] with the central room, the [[हविर्धान|Havirdhāna]] with a place for keeping the grain, etc. (''e.g.,'' Av. iii. 3, 4), the Patnīnāṃ [[सदन|Sadana]] with the women's apartments, and the [[सदस्|Sadas]] with the subsidiary buildings.</ref> ‘fireplace’; Patnīnāṃ [[सदन|Sadana]], ‘wives’ room’; and [[सदस्|Sadas]], ‘sitting room.’ Slings or hanging vessels ('''[[शिक्य|Śikya]]''') are also mentioned.<ref name=fx15_ve1_887> Av. ix. 3, 6. See Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 526;<br> Bloomfield, ''op. cit.,'' 597.</ref> Reedwork (''[[इट|iṭa]]'') is spoken of, no doubt as part of the finishing of the walls of the house.<ref name=fx16_ve1_887> Av. ix. 3, 17.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 148-156.</ref> The sides are called '''[[पक्ष|Pakṣa]].''' The door with its framework was named '''[[आता|Ātā]].'''

गृह-प
<u>'''Gṛha-pa'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_888> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 11.</ref> or '''[[गृह|Gṛha]]-pati'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_888> Rv. vi. 53, 2;<br> Av. xiv. 1, 51;<br> xix. 31, 13;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 6, 8, 5;<br> viii. 6, 1, 11, and repeatedly as an epithet of Agni, Rv. i. 12, 6;<br> 36, 5;<br> 60, 4;<br> vi. 48, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ii. 27;<br> iii. 39;<br> ix. 39;<br> xxiv. 24, etc.</ref> is the regular name, from the Rigveda onwards, of the householder as master of the house. Similarly the mistress is called [[गृह|Gṛha]]-[[पत्नी|patnī]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_888> Rv. x. 85, 26;<br> Av. iii. 24, 6. ''Cf'' Gārhapatya, Rv. i. 15, 12;<br> vi. 15, 19 x. 85, 27. 36.</ref> For the powers and position of the Gṛhapati see '''[[पितृ|Pitṛ]].'''

गृह्य
<u>'''Gṛhya'''</u> denotes the members of the house or family in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].(**  1) ii. 5, 2, 14; 3, 16; 6, 2, 4; iii. 4, 1, 6; xii. 4, 1, 4. ''Cf. gṛhāḥ,'' i. 7, 4; 12.<br>==Foot Notes==

गैरि-क्षित
<u>'''Gairi-kṣita,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Girikṣit,'''’ is the patronymic of '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]]''' in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_890> v. 33, 8;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 155, 174.</ref> and of the '''Yaskas''' in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve1_890> xiii. 12;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 474, 475.</ref>

गो
<u>'''1. Go'''</u> (''a''), ‘ox’ or ‘cow.’<ref name=fx1_ve1_891> i. 83, 1;<br> 135, 8;<br> ii. 23, 18, etc.;<br> ''gāva ukṣaṇaḥ,'' i. 168, 2;<br> Av. iii. 11, 8;<br> '''Vājasaṇeyi''' Saṃhitā, xxi. 20;<br> ''gāvo dhenavaḥ,'' Rv. i. 173. 1;<br> vi. 45. 28;<br> x. 95, 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxi. 19. etc.</ref> These were among the chief sources of wealth to the Vedic Indian, and are repeatedly  referred to from the Rigveda onwards.<ref name=fx2_ve1_891> The five sacrificial animals are man, goat, sheep, ox, horse, Sāṅkhāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 23, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 3, 13;<br> iii. 1, 2, 13;<br> iv. 5, 5, 10;<br> xiv. 1, 1, 32.</ref> The milk ('''[[क्षीर|Kṣīra]]''') was either drunk fresh or made into butter ('''[[घृत|Ghṛta]]''') or curds ('''[[दधि|Dadhi]]'''), or was mixed with '''Soma''' or used for cooking with grain ('''[[क्षीरौदन|Kṣīraudana]]'''). The cows were milked thrice a day, early (''[[प्रातर्|prātar]]-doha''), in the forenoon ('''[[संगव|Saṃgava]]'''), and in the evening (''sāyaṃ-doha'').<ref name=fx3_ve1_891> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 3, 1.</ref> Thrice a day they were driven out to graze, according to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_891> i. 4, 9, 2. The exact sense of this notice is obscure. Strictly speaking the cows were driven out from the cattleshed in the morning, spent the heat of the day in the [[संगविनी|Saṃgavinī]], were then driven out during the evening to graze, and finally came or were driven home, as is often mentioned: Rv. i. 66, 5;<br> 149, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xv. 41.</ref> (''prātaḥ, saṃgave, sāyam''). The first milking was productive, the last two scanty.<ref name=fx3_ve1_891/> According to the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx5_ve1_891> iii. 18, 14.</ref> among the Bharatas the herds in the evening are in the '''[[गोष्ठ|Goṣṭha]],''' at midday in the '''Saṃgavīnī.''' This passage Sāyaṇa expands by saying that the herds go home to the [[शाला|Śālā]], or house for animals, at night so far as they consist of animals giving milk, while the others stayed out in the [[गोष्ठ|Goṣṭha]], or open pasturage; but both were together in the cattle-shed during the heat of the day. The time before the [[संगव|Saṃgava]], when the cows were grazing freely on the pastureland, was called '''[[स्वसर|Svasara]].'''<ref name=fx6_ve1_891> Rv. ii. 2, 2;<br> 34, 8;<br> v. 62, 2;<br> viii. 88, 1;<br> ix. 94, 2. The going of the cows to their pasture in the morning is often referred to--''e.g.,'' Rv. i. 25, 16;<br> x. 97, 8.</ref> When the cows were out feeding they were separated from the calves, which were, however, allowed to join them at the [[संगव|Saṃgava]],<ref name=fx7_ve1_891> Rv. ii. 2, 2;<br> viii. 88, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 1, 3;<br> Śankara on Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 9, 4;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 12, 4;<br> Nārāyaṇa on Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 12, 2.</ref> and sometimes in the evening.<ref name=fx8_ve1_891> Gobhila [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 8, 7;<br> Rv. ii. 2, 2. See Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 111-114.</ref><br><br>While grazing the cattle were under the care of a herdsman ('''[[गोपा|Gopā]], Gopāla''') armed with a goad,<ref name=fx9_ve1_891> ''Pavīravān,'' Rv. x. 60, 3, is probably so meant. The usual name was '''[[अष्ट्रा|Aṣṭrā]],''' the significant mark of a '''[[वैश्य|Vaiśya]].''' ''Cf.'' Rv. vii. 33, 6.</ref> but they were liable to all sorts of dangers, such as being lost, falling into pits, breaking limbs,<ref name=fx10_ve1_891> Rv. i. 120, 8;<br> vi. 54, 5-7. Also Pūṣan was the special deity expected to guard cattle, and hence is called ''anaṣṭapaśu,'' ‘losing no kine.’ See Rv. x. 17, 2. and Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 36.</ref>  and being stolen. The marking of the ears of cattle was repeatedly adopted, no doubt, to indicate ownership.<ref name=fx11_ve1_891> Rv. vi. 28, 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 9, and ''cf.'' '''[[अष्टकर्णी|Aṣṭakarṇī]]''' and '''[[स्वधिति|Svadhiti]].'''</ref><br><br>Large herds of cattle were well-known, as is shown by the Dānastutis, or ‘praises of gifts,’ in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx12_ve1_891> Rv. viii. 5, 37, etc. ''Cf.'' [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 14, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 21. 23;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 8 ''et seq.''</ref> even when allowances are made for the exaggeration of priestly gratitude. The importance attached to the possession of cattle is shown<ref name=fx13_ve1_891> Rv. i. 43, 2;<br> 162, 22;<br> v. 4, 11;<br> ix. 9, 9, etc.;<br> Av. i. 31, 4;<br> ii. 26, 4;<br> v. 29, 2;<br> vi. 68, 3;<br> viii. 7, 11;<br> x. 1, 17. 29;<br> xi. 2, 9. 21, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 3, 1;<br> v. 5, 5, 1;<br> vi. 5, 10, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 59.</ref> by the numerous passages in which the gods are asked to prosper them, and by the repeated prayers<ref name=fx14_ve1_891> Rv. i. 83, 1;<br> iv. 32, 17;<br> v. 4, 11;<br> viii. 89, 2, etc.</ref> for wealth in kine. Hence, too, forays for cattle ('''[[गव्इष्टि|Gaviṣṭi]]''') were well known; the [[भरत|Bharata]] host is called the ‘horde desiring cows’ (''gavyan grāmaḥ'') in the Rigveda;<ref name=fx15_ve1_891> iii. 33, 11.</ref> and a verbal root ''gup,''<ref name=fx16_ve1_891> Rv. vii. 103, 9;<br> Av. x. 9, 7, 8;<br> xix. 27, 9. 10. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 358, n. 13</ref> ‘to protect,’ was evolved as early as the Rigveda from the denominative ''go-pāya,'' ‘to guard cows.’ The Vedic poets<ref name=fx17_ve1_891> Rv. vii. 32, 22;<br> viii. 95, 1;<br> 106, 1;<br> ix. 12, 2, etc.</ref> do not hesitate to compare their songs with the lowing of cows, or to liken the choir of the singing Apsarases to cows.<ref name=fx18_ve1_891> Rv. x. 95, 6. It is, however, uncertain whether the names of Apsarases are meant in this passage. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 5, 517.</ref><br><br>The cattle of the Vedic period were of many colours: red (''[[रोहित|rohita]]''), light (''[[शुक्र|śukra]]''), dappled (''pṛśni''), even black (''[[कृष्ण|kṛṣṇa]]'').<ref name=fx19_ve1_891> Rv. i. 62, 9. Various other colours are mentioned in the lists of animals at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or human sacrifice, in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]], but apparently as exceptional.</ref> Zimmer<ref name=fx20_ve1_891> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 226.</ref> sees a reference to cows with blazes on the face in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx21_ve1_891> i. 87, 1. It is also rendered as ‘the heavens with stars.’</ref> but this is uncertain.<br><br>Oxen were regularly used for ploughing or for drawing wagons (''[[अनड्वाह्|anaḍvāh]]''), in which case they were, it seems, usually castrated.<ref name=fx22_ve1_891> Av. iii. 9, 2;<br> vi. 138, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8. 9, 1;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 151, n. See '''[[महानिरष्ट|Mahāniraṣṭa]].'''</ref> Cows were not properly used for drawing carts, hough they at times did so.<ref name=fx23_ve1_891> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2, 4, 13.</ref> The flesh of both cows and bulls was sometimes eaten ('''Māmsa'''). Cattle were certainly the  objects of individual ownership, and they formed one of the standards of exchange and valuation (see '''[[क्रय|Kraya]]''').<br><br>(''b'') The term '''Go''' is often applied to express the products of the cow. It frequently means the milk,<ref name=fx1b_ve1_891/> but rarely the flesh<ref name=fx2b_ve1_891/> of the animal. In many passages it designates leather used as the material of various objects, as a bowstring,<ref name=fx3b_ve1_891/> or a sling,<ref name=fx4b_ve1_891/> or thongs to fasten part of the chariot,<ref name=fx5b_ve1_891/> or reins,<ref name=fx6b_ve1_891/> or the lash of a whip.<ref name=fx7b_ve1_891/> See also '''[[चर्मन्|Carman]],''' with which Go is sometimes synonymous.<ref name=fx8b_ve1_891/><br><br>(''c'') '''Gāvaḥ''' means the stars of heaven in two passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1c_ve1_891/> according to Roth.<ref name=fx2c_ve1_891/>

गो आङ्गिरस
<u>'''2. Go Āṅgirasa'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[अङ्गिरस्|Aṅgiras]]'''’) is the reputed author of a Sāman or Chant in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_892> xvi. 7, 7. ''Cf.'' Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vi. 11, 3.</ref> There is little doubt that he is mythical.<ref name=fx2_ve1_892> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 160;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 68.</ref>

गो-घात
<u>'''Go-ghāta,'''</u> ‘a cow-killer,’ is enumerated in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha, or human sacrifice, in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_893> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 18;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 16, 1.</ref> See '''[[मांस|Māṃsa]].'''

गोतम
<u>'''Gotama'''</u> is mentioned several times in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_894> Rv. i. 62, 13;<br> 78, 2;<br> 84, 5;<br> 85, 11;<br> iv. 4, 11.</ref> but never in such a way as to denote personal authorship of any hymn.<ref name=fx2_ve1_894> Oldenberg. ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 215.</ref> It seems clear that he was closely connected with the  Aṅgirases, for the Gotamas frequently refer to '''[[अङ्गिरस्|Aṅgiras]].'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_894> ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 62, 1;<br> 71, 2;<br> 74, 5;<br> 75, 2;<br> 78, 3;<br> iv. 2, 5;<br> 16, 8, etc.</ref> That he bore the patronymic [[राहूगण|Rāhūgaṇa]] is rendered probable by one hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx4_ve1_894> Rv. i. 78, 5. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''loc. cit.,'' 236, n. 1.</ref> and is assumed in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx5_ve1_894> i. 4, 1, 10 ''et seq.;<br>'' xi. 4, 3, 20. The former passage is wrongly cited by Sāyaṇa on Rv. i. 81, 3. See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 2, 9, n.</ref> where he appears as the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], or domestic priest, of '''[[माथव|Māthava]] [[विदेघ|Videgha]],''' and as a bearer of Vedic civilization. He is also mentioned in the same [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx6_ve1_894> xi. 4, 3, 20.</ref> as a contemporary of '''[[जनक|Janaka]]''' of '''[[विदेह|Videha]],''' and '''[[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]],''' and as the author of a [[स्तोम|Stoma]].<ref name=fx7_ve1_894> xiii. 5, 1, 1;<br> Āśvalāvana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 5, 6;<br> 10, 8, etc.</ref> He occurs, moreover, in two passages of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx8_ve1_894> iv. 29, 6;<br> xviii. 3, 16. See also Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] in ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 38;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 2, 6.</ref><br><br>The Gotamas are mentioned in several passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx9_ve1_894> i. 60, 5;<br> 61, 16;<br> 63, 9;<br> 77, 5;<br> 78, 1;<br> 88, 4;<br> 92, 7;<br> iv. 32, 9. 12;<br> viii. 88, 4. ''Cf.'' Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 10.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 110, 123;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 170, 180;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 151, 152.</ref> '''[[वामदेव|Vāmadeva]]''' and '''[[नोधस्|Nodhas]]''' being specified as sons of [[गोतम|Gotama]]. They include the '''Vājaśravases.''' See also '''[[गौतम|Gautama]].'''

गोतमी-पुत्र
<u>'''Gotamī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of Gotamī,’ is mentioned as a pupil of '''[[भारद्वाजी-पुत्र|Bhāradvājī-putra]]''' in the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 5, 1). See also '''[[गौतमी-पुत्र|Gautamī-putra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

गोत्र
<u>'''Gotra'''</u> occurs several times in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_896> i. 51, 3;<br> ii. 17, 1;<br> 23, 18;<br> iii. 39, 4;<br> 43, 7;<br> viii. 74, 5;<br> x. 48, 2;<br> 103, 7.</ref> in the account of the mythic exploits of Indra. Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_896> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> interprets the word as ‘cowstall,’ while Geldner<ref name=fx3_ve1_896> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 275, 276, where he divides the passages according as real or mythical herds are meant.</ref> thinks ‘herd’ is meant. The latter sense seems to explain best the employment which the term shows in the later literature as denoting the ‘family’ or ‘clan,’ and which is found in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_896> iv. 4, 1. So [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]];<br> i. 4, 16, etc.;<br> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 4, etc.;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 15.</ref><br><br>In the [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] Sūtras<ref name=fx5_ve1_896> Gobhila [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 4;<br> Āpastamba [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 5, 11, 15. 16, in Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 387. For ''sapiṇḍa,'' see [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiv. 13;<br> [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 17-19.</ref> stress is laid on the prohibition of  marriage within a [[गोत्र|Gotra]], or with a Sapiṇḍa of the mother of the bridegroom--that is to say, roughly, with agnates and cognates. Senart<ref name=fx6_ve1_896> ''Les Castes dans l'Inde,'' 210 ''et seq. Cf.'' De la Vallée Poussin, ''Le Védisme,'' 15.</ref> has emphasized this fact as a basis of caste, on the ground that marriage within a ''curia, phratria,'' or caste ('''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]]''') was Indo-European, as was marriage outside the circle of agnates and cognates. But there is no evidence at all<ref name=fx7_ve1_896> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 471, 472.</ref> to prove that this practice was Indo-European, while in India the Śatapatha<ref name=fx8_ve1_896> i. 8, 3, 6.</ref> expressly recognizes marriage within the third or fourth degree on either side. According to Sāyaṇa, the Kāṇvas accepted marriage in the third degree, the Saurāṣṭras only in the fourth, while the scholiast on the Vajrasūcī<ref name=fx9_ve1_896> See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 73-76.</ref> adḍs to the Kāṇvas the Andhras and the Dākṣiṇātyas, and remarks that the Vājasaneyins forbade marriage with the daughter of the mother's brother. All apparently allowed marriage with the daughter of a paternal uncle, which later was quite excluded. Change of [[गोत्र|Gotra]] was quite possible, as in the case of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]]''' and '''[[गृत्समद|Gṛtsamada]],''' who, once an Aṅgirasa, became a [[भार्गव|Bhārgava]].<ref name=fx10_ve1_896> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 157;<br> ''Festgruss an Roth,'' 108.<br><br>''Cf.'' Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 61 ''et seq.;<br>'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 323.</ref>

गो-दान
<u>'''Go-dāna'''</u> appears to mean ‘the whiskers’ in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_897> iii. 1, 2, 5, 6.</ref> where the person, being consecrated, first shaves off the right and then the left ‘whisker.’ Later on the Godānavidhi, or ceremony of shaving the head, is a regular part of the initiation of a youth on the attainment of manhood and on marriage;<ref name=fx2_ve1_897> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 19;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 28, etc.</ref> but though the ceremony is recognized in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx3_ve1_897> vi. 68. See [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], liii. 1720. But Av. ii. 13 is not to be classed here as in the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]];<br> it refers to the giving of a new garment to a child, and the removal of its first wrap. See Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 56, 57, correcting Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 173, and Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 322, 323. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 306, 574, 665.</ref> the name<ref name=fx4_ve1_897> The meaning ‘whisker’ is a secondary one, derived, doubtless, from the ‘gift of a cow’ (''[[गो-दान|go-dāna]]''), accompanying the ceremony of shaving the whiskers or hair.</ref> does not occur there. 

गोधा
<u>'''Godhā.'''</u>--(''a'') The sense of ‘bowstring’ seems certain in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_898> x. 28, 10. 11.</ref> and possible in another.<ref name=fx2_ve1_898> viii. 69, 9. See Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 53.</ref> Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_898> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 1.</ref> also adopts this meaning in the only passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_898> iv. 3, 6.</ref> where the word occurs.<br><br>(''b'') In one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1b_ve1_898/> the sense of ‘musical instrument’ is recognized by Roth and by Hillebrandt<ref name=fx2b_ve1_898/> for this word.<br><br>(''c'') Elsewhere<ref name=fx1c_ve1_898/> an animal seems to be meant, perhaps the ‘crocodile,’ as Ludwig<ref name=fx2c_ve1_898/> and Weber<ref name=fx3c_ve1_898/> think; perhaps a large ‘lizard,’ as Roth and Zimmer<ref name=fx4c_ve1_898/> assume. An animal is probably also meant in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx5_ve1_898> iv. 3, 6, where Whitney offers no rendering at all.</ref>

गो-धूम
<u>'''Go-dhūma,'''</u> ‘wheat,’ is frequently referred to in the plural in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_899> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 2, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 12;<br> xix. 22. 89;<br> xxi. 29, etc.</ref> and Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx2_ve1_899> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 7, 1, 2;<br> 2, 9;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 3, 22 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 3, 13 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]), etc.</ref> and is expressly distinguished from ‘rice’ ('''[[व्रीहि|Vrīhi]]''') or ‘barley’ ('''Yava''').<ref name=fx3_ve1_899> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 7, 2.</ref> ‘Groats’ (''saktavaḥ'') made of this grain are also mentioned.<ref name=fx4_ve1_899> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 9, 1, 5.</ref> The word occurs in the singular in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx5_ve1_899> v. 2, 1, 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 241.</ref>

गो-पति
<u>'''Go-pati,'''</u> ‘lord of cows,’ is freely used in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_900> i. 101, 4;<br> iv. 24, 1;<br> vi. 45, 21;<br> vii. 18, 4, etc. Av. iii. 14, 6, etc.</ref> to denote any lord or master, a natural usage considering that cattle formed the main species of wealth. 

गोप-वन
<u>'''Gopa-vana'''</u> is the name of a poet of the race of Atri in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_901> viii. 74, 11. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 215;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 107.</ref> See '''[[गौपवन|Gaupavana]].'''

गो-पा
<u>'''Go-pā'''</u> and '''Go-pāla,''' ‘protector of cows,’ occur in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_902> ''[[गोपा|Gopā]]:'' Rv. i. 164, 21;<br> ii. 23, 6;<br> iii. 10, 2;<br> v. 12, 4, etc.;<br> ''Gopāla:'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 11;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 5, 4. ''[[गोपा|Gopā]],'' in the sense of ‘guardian,’ occurs in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxiv. 18, in a compound. ''Gopītha,'' in the sense of ‘protection,’ occurs in Rv. v. 65, 6;<br> x. 35, 14, etc. ''Goptṛ,'' ‘protector,’ first occurs in Av. x. 10, 5, and is thereafter common.</ref> and later, but the former is usually metaphorical in sense, applying to any protector, while the latter has the literal force of ‘cow-herd.’

गो-बल
<u>'''Go-bala'''</u> (‘ox-strength’) '''[[वार्ष्ण|Vārṣṇa]]''' (‘descendant of Vṛṣṇi’) is mentioned as a teacher in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (iii. 11, 9, 3) and the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 6, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

गो-मती
<u>'''Go-matī,'''</u> ‘possessing cows,’ is mentioned as a river in the [[नदी|Nadī]]-[[स्तुति|stuti]], or ‘Praise of Rivers,’ in the tenth Maṇḍala of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_904> x. 75, 6.</ref> In that hymn a river flowing into the Indus must be meant, and its identification<ref name=fx2_ve1_904> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 14;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 200.</ref> with the Gomal, a western tributary of the Indus, cannot be doubted. In one other passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_904> viii. 24. 30.</ref> the accentuation of Gomati shows that a river is meant. It is possible that in a third passage<ref name=fx4_ve1_904> v. 61, 19. See Oldenberg, ''ṚgvedaNoten.'' 1, 355, 356.</ref> the reading should be changed to ''gomatír'' from ''gómatīr.'' Geldner<ref name=fx5_ve1_904> ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 152, n. 2.</ref> suggests that in the two last passages the Gumti, or rather its four upper arms (hence the use of the plural) is meant: this accords well with the later use of the name and with the general probability of the river here intended being in '''[[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]],''' as the centre of Vedic civilization.<ref name=fx6_ve1_904> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 218;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 19 ''et seq.;<br>'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 174;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 1141.</ref> 

गो-मायु
<u>'''Go-māyu,'''</u> ‘lowing like a cow,’ does not occur as the name of the ‘jackal’ till the late Adbhuta [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_905> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 40.</ref>

गो-मृग
<u>'''Go-mṛga,'''</u> a species of ox, now called Gayal (''Bos gavaeus''), is mentioned in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or horse sacrifice, in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_906> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 11;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 1. 30.</ref> and Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve1_906> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 4, 3;<br> 5, 2, 10;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 20, 5.</ref> In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve1_906> ii. 1, 10, 2</ref> it is declared to be neither a wild nor a tame animal; this presumably means that it was semidomesticated, or perhaps that it was both tamed and found wild. With the name of this animal may be compared the [[मृग|Mṛga]] [[महिष|Mahiṣa]], which is clearly mentioned as wild in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx4_ve1_906> ix. 92, 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 83, 84;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 338, n. 1.</ref> See also '''Gayava.'''

गोलत्तिका
<u>'''Golattikā'''</u> is the name of some unknown animal in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or horse sacrifice, in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_907> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 16, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 18;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 37. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 99.</ref>

गो-विकर्तन
<u>'''Go-vikartana'''</u> (‘cow-butcher’) designates the ‘huntsman’ in the Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (v. 3, 1, 10).<ref name=fx1_ve1_908> ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 16, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 18;<br> Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 82.</ref> See '''[[गोघात|Goghāta]].'''

गो-व्यच
<u>'''Go-vyaca.'''</u> See '''Vyaca.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

गोशर्य
<u>'''Gośarya'''</u> is the name of a protégé of the Aśvins in the Rigveda (viii. 8, 20; 49, 1; 50, 10).<br>==Foot Notes==

गो-श्रु जाबाल
<u>'''Go-śru Jābāla'''</u> is mentioned as a sage in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 7, 7).<br>==Foot Notes==

गो-श्रुति वैयाघ्र-पद्य
<u>'''Go-śruti Vaiyāghra-padya'''</u> (‘descendant of Vyāghrapad’) is mentioned as a pupil of '''[[सत्यकाम|Satyakāma]]''' in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (v. 2, 3). In the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka (ix. 7) the name appears as Gośruta. <br>==Foot Notes==

गो-षादी
<u>'''Go-ṣādī'''</u> (‘sitting on a cow’) is the name of a bird in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or horse sacrifice, in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_913> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 24. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 94.</ref>

गो-षूक्तिन्
<u>'''Go-ṣūktin'''</u> is mentioned in the Sarvānukramaṇī as the author of Rigveda viii. 14 and 15, and a Sāman or Chant of his seems to be referred to in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xix. 4, 9), under the title of Gauṣūkta. But see '''[[गौषूक्ति|Gauṣūkti]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

गो-ष्ठ
<u>'''Go-ṣṭha,'''</u> ‘standing-place for cows,’ denotes not so much a ‘cowstall’ as the ‘grazing ground of cows,’ as Geldner<ref name=fx1_ve1_915> ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 112, 113.</ref> shows from a passage of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_915> iii. 18, 14.</ref> and from a note of Mahīdhara on the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx3_ve1_915> iii. 21.</ref> This sense suits adequately all the passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_915> i. 191, 4;<br> vi. 28, 1;<br> viii. 43, 17.</ref> where it occurs, and it greatly improves the interpretation of a hymn of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx5_ve1_915> iii. 14, 1. 5. 6, where Whitney's rendering ‘stall’ is very unsatisfactory, and Bloomfield's ‘stable’ is no better.</ref> besides being acceptable elsewhere.<ref name=fx6_ve1_915> Av. ii. 26, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 21;<br> v. 17;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 8, 3, 2, etc.;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, vii. 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 11.</ref> See also '''Go.'''

गौतम
<u>'''Gautama,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[गोतम|Gotama]],’ is a common patronymic, being applied to '''Aruṇa,'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_916> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 6, 1, 4.</ref> '''[[उद्दालक आरुणि|Uddālaka Āruṇi]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_916> ''Ibid.,'' xi. 4, 1, 3;<br> 5, 1, 2;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 7;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 3, 6 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 1;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 42, 1.</ref> '''Kuśri,'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_916> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 5, 5, 1.</ref> '''Sāti,'''<ref name=fx4_ve1_916> [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] in ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373.</ref> '''[[हारिद्रुमत|Hāridrumata]].'''<ref name=fx5_ve1_916> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], 1. 4, 3.</ref><br><br>Several Gautamas are mentioned in the Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] as pupils of '''[[आग्निवेश्य|Āgniveśya]],'''<ref name=fx6_ve1_916> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 6, 1 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> of '''[[सैतव|Saitava]]''' and '''[[प्राचीनयोग्य|Prācīnayogya]],'''<ref name=fx7_ve1_916> ''Ibid.,'' ii. 6, 2.</ref> of '''[[सैतव|Saitava]],'''<ref name=fx8_ve1_916> ''Ibid.,'' iv. 6, 2.</ref> of '''Bhārad-  [[वाज|vāja]],'''<ref name=fx9_ve1_916> ''Ibid.,'' ii. 6, 2 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]] = ii. 5, 22;<br> iv. 5, 27 Mādhyaṃdina).</ref> of '''[[गौतम|Gautama]],'''<ref name=fx10_ve1_916> ''Ibid.,'' ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]] = ii. 5, 22;<br> iv. 5, 28 Mādhyaṃdina).</ref> and of '''[[वात्स्य|Vātsya]].'''<ref name=fx11_ve1_916> ''Ibid.,'' ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]] = ii. 5, 20. 22;<br> iv. 5, 28 Mādhyaṃdina). The Mādhyaṃdina, ii. 5, 20;<br> iv. 5, 26, knows a [[गौतम|Gautama]], pupil of '''Vaijavāpāyana''' and '''[[वैष्ठपुरेय|Vaiṣṭhapureya]].'''</ref> A [[गौतम|Gautama]] is also referred to elsewhere.

गौतमी-पुत्र
<u>'''Gautamī-putra'''</u> (‘son of a female descendant of Gotama’) is mentioned in the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 5, 2) as a pupil of '''[[भारद्वाजीपुत्र|Bhāradvājīputra]].''' In the Mādhyaṃdina (vi. 4, 31) a [[गौतमीपुत्र|Gautamīputra]] is a pupil of '''[[आत्रेयीपुत्र|Ātreyīputra]],''' pupil of a [[गौतमीपुत्र|Gautamīputra]], pupil of '''[[वात्सीपुत्र|Vātsīputra]].''' See also '''[[गोतमीपुत्र|Gotamīputra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

गौप-वन
<u>'''Gaupa-vana'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[गोपवन|Gopavana]]'''’) is mentioned as a pupil of '''[[पौतिमाष्य|Pautimāṣya]]''' in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) in the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (ii. 6, 1; iv. 6, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

गौपायन
<u>'''Gaupāyana'''</u> (‘descendant of Gopa’). The Gaupāyanas appear in the legend of '''Asamāti, [[किरात|Kirāta]],''' and '''[[आकुलि|Ākuli]],''' which is first met with in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve1_919> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 12, 5;<br> Jaiminīva [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 167 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 41);<br> Sāṭyāyanaka in Sāyaṇa on Rv. x. 57 (Max Müller's edition, 4^2, c ''et seq.'');<br> Bṛhaddevatā, vii. 83 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes.</ref>

गौपालायन
<u>'''Gaupālāyana'''</u> (‘descendant of Gopāla’) is the patronymic of '''Śucivṛkṣa''' in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_920> iii. 10, 4 (p. 135, line 9). ''Cf.'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 48, 9, where Aufrecht reads ''Gaupalāyana.''</ref> It is also the patronymic of '''[[औपोदिति|Aupoditi]],''' [[स्थपति|Sthapati]] of the '''Kurus,''' in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_920> xx. 25.</ref> and, as Gaupāleya, of Upoditi or [[औपोदिति|Aupoditi]] in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_920> xii. 13, 11, where the edition has ''Upoditi.''</ref>

गौर
<u>'''Gaura,'''</u> a species of ox (''Bos gaurus''), is frequently mentioned with the '''[[गवय|Gavaya]]''' from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_921> i. 16, 5;<br> iv. 21, 8;<br> 58, 2;<br> v. 78, 2;<br> vii. 69, 6;<br> 98, 1, etc.</ref> onwards.<ref name=fx2_ve1_921> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 10;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 28;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 34, etc.</ref> As the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve1_921> xiii. 48.</ref> expressly mentions wild (''āraṇya'') Gauras, they  must usually have been tame. The female, Gaurī, is also often referred to.<ref name=fx4_ve1_921> Rv. i. 84, 10;<br> iv. 12, 6;<br> ix. 12, 3;<br> and in the obscure verse i. 164, 11.</ref> The compound term [[गौर|Gaura]]-[[मृग|mṛga]] (‘the [[गौर|Gaura]] wild beast’) is sometimes met with.<ref name=fx5_ve1_921> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 32;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 8.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 83, 224.</ref>

गौरि-वीति शाक्त्य
<u>'''Gauri-vīti Śāktya'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[शक्ति|Śakti]]'''’) or '''Gaurīviti,''' as the name is also spelt,<ref name=fx1_ve1_922> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 8, 3, 7;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5;<br> xii. 13;<br> xxv. 7.</ref> is the [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]], or Seer, of a hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_922> v. 29, 11.</ref> and is frequently mentioned in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx3_ve1_922> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 19;<br> viii. 2 and see n. 1.</ref> According to the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx4_ve1_922> ii. 233 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 38).<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 126;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 215.</ref> he was [[प्रस्तोतृ|Prastotṛ]] at the Sattra, or sacrificial session, celebrated by the '''Vibhindukīyas''' and mentioned in that [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].

गौश्र
<u>'''Gauśra'''</u> (‘descendant of Guśri’) is the name of a teacher mentioned in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xvi. 9; xxiii. 5). See '''[[गौश्ल|Gauśla]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

गौश्रायणि
<u>'''Gauśrāyaṇi'''</u> (‘descendant of Gauśra’) is the patronymic of a teacher, '''[[चित्र|Citra]],''' in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xxiii. 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

गौश्ल
<u>'''Gauśla,'''</u> a variant of '''[[गौश्र|Gauśra]],''' is the name of a teacher represented as in disagreement with '''Buḍila Āśvatara Āśvi''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_925> vi. 30. ''Cf.'' Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 9 (Gośla).</ref>

गौ-षूक्ति
<u>'''Gau-ṣūkti'''</u> is the name of a pupil of '''[[इष श्यावाश्वि|Iṣa Śyāvāśvi]]''' according to the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_926> iv. 16, 1.</ref> in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers). It is also the name, in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_926> xix. 4, 9. ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 30.</ref>  of a teacher who appears to have been needlessly invented to explain the Gauṣūkta Sāman (chant), which is really the Sāman of '''[[गोषूक्तिन्|Goṣūktin]].'''

ग्रह
<u>'''Graha'''</u> (‘seizing’) is a term applied to the sun in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_927> iv. 6, 5, 1.</ref> most probably not in the later sense of ‘planet,’ but to denote a power exercising magical influence.<ref name=fx2_ve1_927> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 432, n. 2.</ref> The sense of ‘planet’ seems first to occur in the later literature, as in the Maitrāyaṇī [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_927> vi. 16. See Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 98, n.</ref> The question whether the planets were known to the Vedic Indians is involved in obscurity. Oldenberg<ref name=fx4_ve1_927> ''Religion des Veda,'' 185 ''et seq.;<br> Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 50, 56 ''et seq.''</ref> recognizes them in the Ādityas, whose number is, he believes, seven; sun, moon, and the five planets. But this view, though it cannot be said to be impossible or even unlikely, is not susceptible of proof, and has been rejected by Hillebrandt,<ref name=fx5_ve1_927> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 102 ''et seq.''</ref> Pischel,<ref name=fx6_ve1_927> ''Go7ttingische Gelehrte Anxeigen,'' 1895. 447.</ref> von Schroeder,<ref name=fx7_ve1_927> ''Vienna Oriental Journal,'' 9, 109.</ref> Macdonell,<ref name=fx8_ve1_927> ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 44.</ref> and Bloomfield,<ref name=fx9_ve1_927> ''Religion of the Veda,'' 133 ''et seq.''</ref> among others. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx10_ve1_927> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 423.</ref> sees the planets in the five Adhvaryus mentioned in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx11_ve1_927> iii. 7, 7.</ref> but this is a mere conjecture. The five bulls (''ukṣāṇaḥ'') in another passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx12_ve1_927> i. 105, 10. ''Cf.'' also i. 105, 16, with Oldenberg's note.</ref> have received a similar interpretation with equal uncertainty,<ref name=fx13_ve1_927> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 24, 36.</ref> and [[दुर्ग|Durga]], in his commentary on the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx14_ve1_927> i. 14.</ref> even explains the term ''bhūmija,'' ‘earth-born,’ which is only mentioned by [[यास्क|Yāska]], as meaning the planet Mars.<ref name=fx15_ve1_927> See Weber, ''[[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]],'' 10, n. 2.</ref> Thibaut,<ref name=fx16_ve1_927> ''Astronomie, Astrologie, und Mathematik,'' 6.</ref> who is generally sceptical as to the mention of planets in the Veda, thinks that [[बृहस्पति|Bṛhaspati]] there refers to Jupiter; but this is extremely improbable, though in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx17_ve1_927> iv. 4 10, 1. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 102-104.</ref> [[बृहस्पति|Bṛhaspati]] is made the regent of [[तिष्य|Tiṣya]]. A reference to the  planets is much more probable in the seven suns (''[[सप्त सूर्याः|sapta sūryāḥ]]'') of the late [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx18_ve1_927> i. 7. See on them Weber, ''Omina und Portenta,'' 339;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 2, 238;<br> 9, 363;<br> 10, 240, 271;<br> ''[[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]],'' 10;<br> ''Rāmāyaṇa,'' 28, n. 2.</ref> On the other hand, Ludwig's efforts to find the five planets with the sun, the moon, and the twenty-seven Nakṣatras (lunar mansions) in the Rigveda, as corresponding to the number thirty-four used in connexion with light<ref name=fx19_ve1_927> x. 55, 3.</ref> (''jyotis'') and the ribs of the sacrificial horse,<ref name=fx20_ve1_927> i. 162, 18.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 183 ''et seq.;<br>'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 354 ''et seq.;<br>'' Max Müller, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' iv. 2, xxx. ''et seq.;<br>'' Whitney, ''Oriental and Linguistic Essays,'' 2, 412, n. ''Journal of the American Oriental Society'' 16, lxxxviii.</ref> is farfetched. See also '''[[शुक्र|Śukra]], [[मन्थिन्|Manthin]], Vena.'''

ग्राभ
<u>'''Grābha'''</u> (lit. ‘grasping’) designates the ‘throw’ of dice in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_928> viii. 81, 1;<br> ix. 106, 3. ''Cf.'' Lüders, ''Das Wūrfelspiel im alten Indien,'' 49, 50.</ref> See also '''[[ग्लह|Glaha]].'''

ग्राम
<u>'''Grāma.'''</u>--The primitive sense of this word, which occurs frequently from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_929> i. 44, 10;<br> 114, 1;<br> ii. 12, 7 (perhaps to be taken as in n. 10);<br> x. 146, 1;<br> 149, 4, etc.;<br> Av. iv. 36, 7, 8;<br> v. 17, 4;<br> vi. 40, 2, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 45;<br> xx. 17, etc.</ref> onwards, appears to have been ‘village.’ The Vedic Indians must have dwelt in villages which were scattered over the country, some close together,<ref name=fx2_ve1_929> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 2, 4, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 44.</ref> some far apart, and were connected by roads.<ref name=fx3_ve1_929> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 6, 2.</ref> The village is regularly contrasted with the forest (''[[अरण्य|araṇya]]''), and its animals and plants with those that lived or grew wild in the woods.<ref name=fx4_ve1_929> Animals: Rv. x. 90, 8;<br> Av. ii. 34, 4;<br> iii. 10, 6;<br> 31, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 2, 2, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, vii. 7;<br> xiii. 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ix. 32;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 1, 9;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8. 4, 16, etc. Plants: [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 5, 5;<br> vii. 3, 4, 1, etc.</ref> The villages contained cattle, horses, and other domestic animals, as well as men.<ref name=fx5_ve1_929> Av. iv. 22, 2;<br> viii. 7, 11, etc.</ref> Grain was also stored in them.<ref name=fx6_ve1_929> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 3, 13 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]] = 22, Mādhyaṃdina).</ref> In the evening the cattle regularly returned thither from the forest.<ref name=fx7_ve1_929> Rv. x. 149, 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 1.</ref> The villages were probably open, though perhaps a fort ('''Pur''') might on  occasion be built inside.<ref name=fx8_ve1_929> As nowadays. See Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 144, citing Hügel, Kashmir, 2, 45.</ref> Presumably they consisted of detached houses with enclosures, but no details are to be found in Vedic literature. Large villages (''mahāgrāmāḥ'') were known.<ref name=fx9_ve1_929> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 13. 4.</ref><br><br>The relation of the villagers is difficult to ascertain with precision. In several passages<ref name=fx10_ve1_929> Rv. i. 100, 10;<br> iii. 33, 11;<br> x. 27, 1;<br> 127, 5;<br> Av. iv. 7, 5;<br> v. 20, 3 (where, however, ‘villages’ is quite probable);<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 5, 2;<br> vi. 7, 4, 9;<br> xii. 4, 1, 3. ''Cf.'' n. 1.</ref> the word occurs with what appears to be the derivative sense of ‘body of men.’ This sense presumably started from the use of the word to denote the ‘village folk,’ as when '''[[शर्यात|Śaryāta]] [[मानव|Mānava]]''' is said in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx11_ve1_929> iv. 1, 5, 2. 7.</ref> to have wandered about with his ‘village’ (''grāmeṇa''); but, as Zimmer<ref name=fx12_ve1_929> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 161.</ref> observes, this restricted sense nowhere appears clearly in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx13_ve1_929> See passages cited in n. 10.</ref> where indeed the ‘folk’ (''jana'')<ref name=fx14_ve1_929> Rv. iii. 53, 12.</ref> of the Bharatas is in one passage<ref name=fx15_ve1_929> Rv. iii. 33, 11.</ref> called the ‘horde seeking cows’ (''gavyan grāmaḥ''). Zimmer<ref name=fx16_ve1_929> ''Op. cit.,'' 159, 160, where, however, his language is not very clear. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Religions of India,'' 27, who points out that Zimmer is inaccurate in identifying the tribe with [[विश्|Viś]]. It is the clan, a division below that of the tribe ('''Jana''').</ref> tends to regard the [[ग्राम|Grāma]] as a clan, and as standing midway between the family and the tribe ('''[[विश्|Viś]]'''). The [[ग्राम|Grāma]] may, however, perhaps be regarded more correctly<ref name=fx17_ve1_929> A village might contain a whole clan, but probably it contained at most a section of a clan. By family is meant a Hindu joint family;<br> but the extent to which such families existed, and the number of persons included, cannot even be conjectured from the avail able evidence. ''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prchistoric Antiquities,'' 393;<br> Leist, ''Altarisches Jos Gentium,'' 34.</ref> as an aggregate of several families, not necessarily forming a clan, but only part of a clan ('''[[विश्|Viś]]'''), as is often the case at the present day.<ref name=fx18_ve1_929> ''Cf.'' Baden Powell, ''Village Communities in India,'' 85 ''et seq.''</ref><br><br>Vedic literature tells us very little about the social economy of the village. There is nothing to show that the community as such held land. What little evidence there is indicates that individual tenure of land was known (see '''[[उर्वरा|Urvarā]], [[क्षेत्र|Kṣetra]]'''), but this, in effect though not in law, presumably meant tenure by a family rather than by an individual person. The expression  ‘desirous of a village’ (''[[ग्राम|grāma]]-kāma''), which occurs frequently in the later Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx19_ve1_929> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 1, 2;<br> 3, 2;<br> 3, 9, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 9;<br> 2, 3;<br> iv. 2, 7, etc.;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 32, thinks that ''[[ग्राम|grāma]]'' here means ‘herd’ (of cattle).</ref> points, however, to the practice of the king's granting to his favourites his royal prerogatives over villages so far as fiscal matters were concerned. Later<ref name=fx20_ve1_929> ''Cf.'' Baden Powell, ''Indian Village Community,'' 207 ''et seq.'' Whether or not the idea is already found in Manu, ix. 34, is disputed and uncertain. See [[राजन्|Rājan]]. The germ of it lies in a different sphere--the right of the '''[[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]],''' with the consent of the clan, to apportion land (Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 1, 1, 8).</ref> the idea developed that the king was owner of all the land, and parallel with that idea the view that the holders of such grants were landlords. But of either idea there is no vestige in Vedic literature beyond the word ''[[ग्राम|grāma]]-kāma,'' which much more probably refers to the grant of regalia than to the grant of land, as Teutonic parallels show.<ref name=fx21_ve1_929> ''Cf.'' Pollock and Maitland, ''History of English Law,'' 2, 237 ''et seq.;<br>'' Baden Powell, ''Village Communities in India,'' 83;<br> Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 48. It may be mentioned that we have no Vedic evidence as to the non-sale of land by the members of a family, except the indications mentioned under '''[[उर्वरा|Urvarā]].''' The later evidence is overwhelming for ''[[ग्राम|grāma]],'' meaning ‘village.’<br><br>''Cf.'' Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 2, 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 14;<br> [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 94.</ref> Such grants probably tended to depress the position of the actual cultivators, and to turn them into tenants, but they can hardly have had this effect to any appreciable extent in early times.<br><br>The village does not appear to have been a unit for legal purposes in early days,<ref name=fx22_ve1_929> ''Cf.'' Foy, ''Die ko7nigliche Gewalt,'' 20, n.;<br> Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 93;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 78, 128.</ref> and it can hardly be said to have been a political unit. The village no doubt, as later, included in its members various menials, besides the cultivating owners, and also the Brāhmaṇas and Kṣatriyas who might hold interest in it by royal grant or usage without actually cultivating land, such as chariot-makers ('''[[रथ-कार|Ratha-kāra]]'''), carpenters ('''[[तक्षन्|Takṣan]]'''), smiths ('''[[कर्मार|Karmāra]]'''), and others, but they did not presumably, in any sense, form part of the brotherhood.<ref name=fx23_ve1_929> ''Cf.'' Baden Powell, ''Indian Village Community,'' 17, 18.</ref> All alike were politically subject to the king, and bound to render him food or service or other tribute, unless he had transferred his rights to  others of the royal family or household, as was no doubt often the case, either in whole or part. The king's share in a village is referred to as early as the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx24_ve1_929> iv. 22, 2. ''Cf.'' n. 20.</ref><br><br>At the head of the village was the [[ग्राम|Grāma]]-ṇī, or ‘leader of the village,’ who is referred to in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx25_ve1_929> x. 62, 11;<br> 107, 5.</ref> and often in the later Saṃhitās and in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx26_ve1_929> Av. iii. 5, 7;<br> xix. 31, 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 4, 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 6, 5 (''[[ग्राम|grāma]]-ṇīthya,'' ‘the rank of Grāmaṇī’: ''cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 5, 2);<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, viii. 4;<br> x. 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xv. 15;<br> xxx. 20;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 4, 8;<br> 7, 3, 4;<br> ii. 7, 18, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 1, 7;<br> v. 4, 4, 8;<br> viii. 6, 2, 1 (''grāmaṇīthya'');<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 3, 37. 38, etc.</ref> The exact meaning of the title is not certain. By Zimmer<ref name=fx27_ve1_929> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 171.</ref> the Grāmaṇī is regarded as having had military functions only, and he is certainly often connected with the '''[[सेनानी|Senānī]],''' or ‘leader of an army.’ But there is no reason so to restrict the sense: presumably the Grāmaṇī was the head of the village both for civil purposes and for military operations. He is ranked in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx28_ve1_929> v. 4, 4, 18.</ref> as inferior to the '''[[सूत|Sūta]],''' or ‘charioteer,’ with whom, however, he is associated<ref name=fx29_ve1_929> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 1, 5.</ref> as one of the '''Ratnins,''' the ‘jewels’ of the royal establishment. The post was especially valuable to a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]], who, if he attained it, was at the summit of prosperity (''gataśrī'').<ref name=fx30_ve1_929> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 4, 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 6, 5. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 20, n. 2.</ref> The Grāmaṇī's connexion with the royal person seems to point to his having been a nominee of the king rather than a popularly elected officer. But the post may have been sometimes hereditary, and sometimes nominated or elective: there is no decisive evidence available. The use of the singular presents difficulties: possibly the Grāmaṇī of the village or city where the royal residence was situated was specially honoured and influential.<ref name=fx31_ve1_929> Presumably, there must have been many Grāmaṇīs in a kingdom, but the texts seem to contemplate only one as in the royal entourage. ''Cf.'' also Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 60, n.;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 96;<br> Rhys Davids, ''op. cit.,'' 48, thinks that he was elected by the village council or a hereditary officer, because the appointment is only claimed for the king in late authorities like Manu, vii. 115. But there is not even so much authority for election or heredity, and we really cannot say how far the power of the early princes extended: it probably varied very much. ''Cf.'' '''[[राजन्|Rājan]]''' and '''[[चित्ररथ|Citraratha]].'''</ref> 

ग्राम्य-वादिन्
<u>'''Grāmya-vādin'''</u> apparently means a ‘village judge’ in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_930> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 1, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 4;<br> Maitrāyanī Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 1.</ref> His '''[[सभा|Sabhā]],''' ‘court,’ is mentioned in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā.

ग्राह
<u>'''Grāha,'''</u> ‘the seizer,’ is the name of a disease in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_931> iii. 5, 3, 25;<br> 6, 1, 25.</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_931> xi. 9, 12.</ref> it perhaps means ‘paralysis’ of the thigh.<ref name=fx3_ve1_931> If the reading of the commentary ''ūru-grāhaiḥ'' be adopted;<br> but Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 653, retaining the reading of the text ''urugrāhaiḥ,'' renders the compound as an adjective, ‘wide-gripping.’ ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 635.</ref>

ग्राहि
<u>'''Grāhi,'''</u> ‘the seizer,’ appears in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_932> x. 161, 1.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_932> ii. 9, 1;<br> 10, 6. 8;<br> vi. 112, 1;<br> 113, 1;<br> viii. 2, 12;<br> 3, 18;<br> xvi. 7, 1;<br> 8, 1;<br> xix. 45, 5.</ref> as a female demon of disease. Her son is sleep (''[[स्वप्न|svapna]]'').<ref name=fx3_ve1_932> xvi. 5, 1;<br> or perhaps ‘dream’ is meant.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 154.</ref>

ग्रीष्म
<u>'''Grīṣma.'''</u> See '''[[ऋतु|Ṛtu]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

ग्रैव्य
<u>'''Graivya,'''</u> in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_934> vi. 25, 2;<br> vii. 76, 2. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Proceedings of the American Oriental Society,'' October, 1887, xix.;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 472.</ref> appears to denote ‘tumours on the neck’ (''grīvāḥ'').

ग्लह
<u>'''Glaha'''</u> denotes the ‘throw’ at dice, like '''[[ग्राभ|Grābha]],''' of which it is a later form, occurring in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_935> iv. 28, 1 ''et seq. Cf.'' Lüders, ''Das Würfelspiel im alten Indien,'' 49.</ref>

ग्लाव मैत्रेय
<u>'''Glāva Maitreya'''</u> (‘descendant of Maitrī’) is mentioned in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_936> i. 12, 1. 3. ''Cf.'' Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 31.</ref> where he is said to be the same as '''[[वक दाल्भ्य|Vaka Dālbhya]].''' He appears as Pratistotṛ at the snake festival of the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_936> xxv. 15, 3.</ref> and is referred to in the Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_936> i. 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 35, 38.</ref> 

ग्लौ
<u>'''Glau'''</u> occurs in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_937> vi. 83, 3.</ref> and in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_937> i. 25.</ref> as the name of some symptom of a disease, probably, as Bloomfield<ref name=fx3_ve1_937> ''Proceedings of the American Oriental Society,'' October, 1887, xv.;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 17, 503;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 343.</ref> thinks, ‘boils.’ In the one passage of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhita,<ref name=fx4_ve1_937> xxv. 8;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 15, 7.</ref> where it is found the sense is obscure, some part of the sacrificial victim being perhaps meant.<ref name=fx5_ve1_937> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 500, takes ''glau'' as ‘owl.’</ref><br><br>''Cf.'' '''[[गलुन्त|Galunta]].'''

घर्म
<u>'''Gharma'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_938> iii. 53, 14;<br> v. 30, 15;<br> 43, 7;<br> 76, 1, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_938> Av. vii. 73, 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, viii. 61;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 18. 22, etc.</ref> the pot used for heating milk, especially for the offering to the Aśvins. It hence often<ref name=fx3_ve1_938> Rv. i. 119, 2;<br> 180, 4;<br> vii. 70, 2;<br> viii. 9, 4, etc.;<br> Av. iv. 1, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxviii. 6, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 32;<br> xi. 42;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 271;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> denotes the hot milk itself, or some other hot drink.

घास
<u>'''Ghāsa'''</u> means ‘fodder’ in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_939> Av. iv. 38, 7;<br> viii. 7, 8;<br> xi. 5, 18, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_939> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xi. 75;<br> xxi. 43;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 9, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 10, etc.</ref> In the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_939> i. 162, 14.</ref> Ghāsi is used of the fodder of the horse victim at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]].

घृणीवन्त्
<u>'''Ghṛṇīvant'''</u> is the name of some animal in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or horse sacrifice, in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_940> xxiv. 39.</ref> In the parallel passage of the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_940> iii. 14, 20.</ref> Ghṛṇāvant is the reading. Elsewhere the word is adjectival.<ref name=fx3_ve1_940> Rv. x. 176, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 99.</ref> 

घृत
<u>'''Ghṛta,'''</u> the modern Ghee or ‘clarified butter,’ is repeatedly mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_941> i. 134, 6;<br> ii. 10, 4;<br> iv. 10, 6;<br> 58, 5. 7. 9;<br> v. 12, 1, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_941> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ii. 22, etc.;<br> Av. iii. 13, 5, etc.;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 1, 7 (with [[दधि|Dadhi]], [[मस्तु|Mastu]], Amikṣā);<br> ix. 2, 1, 1 ([[दधि|Dadhi]], [[मधु|Madhu]], [[घृत|Ghṛta]]), etc.</ref> both as in ordinary use and as a customary form of sacrifice. According to a citation in Sāyaṇa's commentary on the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_941> i. 3 (p. 240, edition Aufrecht).</ref> the distinction between [[घृत|Ghṛta]] and '''[[सर्पिस्|Sarpis]]''' consisted in the latter being butter fully melted, while the former was butter melted and hardened (''ghanī-bhūta''), but this distinction cannot be pressed. Because the butter was thrown into the fire, Agni is styled ‘butter-faced’ (''[[घृत|ghṛta]]-pratīka''),<ref name=fx4_ve1_941> Rv. i. 143, 7;<br> iii. 1, 18;<br> v. 11, 1;<br> x. 21, 7, etc.</ref> ‘butter-backed’ (''[[घृत|ghṛta]]-pṛṣṭha''),<ref name=fx5_ve1_941> Rv. i. 164, 1;<br> v. 4, 3;<br> 37, 1;<br> vii. 2, 4, etc.</ref> and ‘propitiated with butter’ (''[[घृत|ghṛta]]-prasatta''),<ref name=fx6_ve1_941> Rv. v. 15. 1.</ref> and ‘found of butter’ (''[[घृत|ghṛta]]-prī'').<ref name=fx7_ve1_941> Av. xii. 1, 20;<br> xviii. 4, 41.</ref> Water was used to purify the butter: the waters were therefore called ‘butter-cleansing’ (''[[घृत|ghṛta]]-pū'').<ref name=fx8_ve1_941> i. 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 227.</ref> In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]^9 it is said that [[आज्य|Ājya]], [[घृत|Ghṛta]], [[आयुत|Āyuta]], and [[नवनीत|Navanīta]] pertain to gods, men, Pitṛs, and embryos respectively.

घृत-कौशिक
<u>'''Ghṛta-kauśika'''</u> is mentioned in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) of the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_942> ii. 5. 21;<br> iv. 5, 27. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 384.</ref> as a pupil of '''[[पाराशर्यायण|Pārāśaryāyaṇa]].'''

घोर आङ्गिरस
<u>'''Ghora Āṅgirasa'''</u> is the name of a mythical teacher in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_943> xxx. 6. ''Cf.'' Āśvalāyana Śrauta Sütra, xii. 10.</ref> and the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_943> iii. 17, 6.</ref> where he is teacher of the strange '''[[कृष्ण देवकीपुत्र|Kṛṣṇa Devakīputra]].''' That the name is certainly a mere figment is shown by the fact that this ‘dread descendant of the Aṅgirases’ has a counterpart in '''[[भिषज् आथर्वण|Bhiṣaj Ātharvaṇa]],'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_943> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 459.</ref> ‘the healing descendant of the Atharvans,’ while in the Rigveda Sūtras<ref name=fx4_ve1_943> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 7;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 2;<br> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society.'' 17, 181.</ref> the ''Atharvāṇo vedaḥ'' is connected  with ''bheṣajam'' and the ''Āṅgiraso vedaḥ'' with ''ghoram.'' He is accordingly a personification of the dark side of the practice of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx5_ve1_943> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' xx, xxi, xxxviii;<br> ''Atharvaveda,'' 8, 23;<br> Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 189, 190;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 160, n. 4.</ref> He is also mentioned in the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] section of the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx6_ve1_943> i. 1.</ref>

घोष
<u>'''Ghoṣa.'''</u> See '''[[घोषा|Ghoṣā]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

घोषवन्त्
<u>'''Ghoṣavant.'''</u> See '''[[स्वर|Svara]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

घोषा
<u>'''Ghoṣā'''</u> is mentioned as a protégée of the Aśvins in two passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_946> i. 117, 7;<br> x. 40, 5. ''Cf.'' x. 39, 3. 6.</ref> probably as the recipient of a husband, who is perhaps referred to in another passage<ref name=fx2_ve1_946> i. 122, 5. See Oldenberg, ''ṚgvedaNoten,'' 1, 123.</ref> as Arjuna, though this is not likely. Sāyaṇa finds a reference there to a skin disease, which is considered in the later tradition of the Bṛhaddevatā<ref name=fx3_ve1_946> vii. 41-48, with Macdonell's notes.</ref> to have been the cause of her remaining unwed, but this view is not tenable. According to Sāyaṇa, her son, Suhastya, is alluded to in an obscure verse of the Rigveda;<ref name=fx4_ve1_946> i. 120, 5.</ref> Oldenberg,<ref name=fx5_ve1_946> ''Op. cit.,'' 119. Suhastya is apparently invented from x. 41, 3, probably assisted by the fact that [[वध्रिमती|Vadhrimatī]] was given a son, '''[[हिरण्यहस्त|Hiraṇyahasta]],''' by the Aśvins (Rv. i. 117, 24).</ref> however, here sees a reference to [[घोषा|Ghoṣā]] herself, while Pischel<ref name=fx6_ve1_946> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 4;<br> 2, 92.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 143;<br> ''Über Methode bei Interpretation des Rigveda,'' 43;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 247;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 52.</ref> thinks that the form (''ghoṣe'') is not a noun at all, but verbal.

चक
<u>'''Caka'''</u> is mentioned with [[पिशङ्ग|Piśaṅga]] as one of the two Unnetṛ priests at the snake festival in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_947> xxv. 15, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 35. who reads ''Cakka;<br>'' 10, 142. n. 3, 144</ref> 

चक्र
<u>'''Cakra,'''</u> the ‘wheel’ of a chariot or wagon, is repeatedly mentioned from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_948> i. 130, 9;<br> 155, 6;<br> 164, 2. 11. 14;<br> 174, 5;<br> iv. 1, 3, etc.</ref> onwards, often in a metaphorical sense. The wheel was fixed on the axle ('''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]]''') when the chariot was required for use; this required considerable strength, as is shown by a reference in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_948> Av. xi. 7, 4;<br> xix. 53, 1. 2, etc.</ref> The wheel consisted normally of spokes ('''Ara'''), and a nave ('''[[नाभि|Nābhi]]'''),<ref name=fx3_ve1_948> Rv. viii. 41, 6.</ref> in the opening ('''Kha''') of which the end of the axle ('''[[आणि|Āṇi]]''') was inserted. An indication of the importance attached to the strength of the wheel is the celebration of the car of the god Pūṣan as having a wheel that suffers no damage.<ref name=fx4_ve1_948> Rv. vi. 54, 3.</ref> The usual number of wheels was two,<ref name=fx5_ve1_948> Rv. viii. 5, 29;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 16, 5;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 4.</ref> but in seven passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve1_948> i. 118, 2;<br> 157, 3;<br> 183, 1;<br> viii. 58, 3;<br> x. 41, 1;<br> 85, 14 (all of the Aśvins' chariot);<br> iv. 36, 1 (of a chariot made by the Ṛbhus, who are three in number).</ref> a chariot is called ‘three-wheeled,’ in a few others ‘sevenwheeled,’<ref name=fx7_ve1_948> Rv. i. 164, 3, 12;<br> ii. 40, 3.</ref> while in one of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx8_ve1_948> xi. 4, 22.</ref> it is styled ‘eightwheeled.’ Zimmer<ref name=fx9_ve1_948> ''Altindisches Leben,'' viii., ix.</ref> argues that these epithets do not refer to real chariots, pointing out that in all the passages where ''tri-[[चक्र|cakra]],'' ‘three-wheeled,’ occurs there is a mythical reference. On the other hand, Weber<ref name=fx10_ve1_948> ''Proceedings of the Berlin Acadcmy,'' 1898, 564, quoting Virchow, ''Zeistchrift für Ethnologie,'' 5, 200.</ref> thinks that there might have been chariots with three wheels, one being in the centre between the two occupants. This is not very conclusive; at any rate, the seven-wheeled and the eight-wheeled chariots can hardly be regarded as indicating the existence of real vehicles with that number of wheels.<br><br>In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx11_ve1_948> xi. 8, 1, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 247.</ref> the potter's wheel (''kaulālacakra'') is referred to.

चक्र-वाक
<u>'''Cakra-vāka'''</u> is the name, apparently derived from the nature of its cry, of a species of gander (''Anas casarca''), the modern Chakwā, as it is called in Hindī, or Brahmany duck in English.<ref name=fx1_ve1_949> Criffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 309, n. 4.</ref> It is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_949> ii. 39, 3.</ref> and in the list of victims at the  [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or horse sacrifice, in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_949> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 3. 13;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 22. 32;<br> xxv. 8.</ref> while in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_949> xiv. 2, 64.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 89.</ref> it already appears as the type of conjugal fidelity, its characteristic in the classical literature.

चक्षुस्
<u>'''Cakṣus,'''</u> ‘eye.’ The ‘evil eye’ (''ghoraṃ [[चक्षुस्|cakṣus]]'') was well known in the Atharvaveda, which contains spells to counteract its influence.<ref name=fx1_ve1_950> ii. 7;<br> xix. 45, are so employed in the ritual.</ref> As remedies against it are mentioned salve from Mount '''Trikakubh'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_950> Av. iv. 9, 6.</ref> and the '''[[जङ्गिड|Jaṅgiḍa]]''' plant.<ref name=fx3_ve1_950> Av. xix. 35, 3.</ref> In the wedding ceremony the wife is entreated not to have the evil eye (''aghoracakṣus'').<ref name=fx4_ve1_950> Pāraskara [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 16.</ref> The structure of the eye, and its division into white (''[[शुक्ल|śukla]]''), dark (''[[कृष्ण|kṛṣṇa]]''), and the pupil (''kanīn ikā'') are repeatedly referred to in the later Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx5_ve1_950> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 8, 2, 26;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 254. 324;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 26, 1;<br> 34, 1;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 2, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 1, 5, etc. So the man ('''puru 1''') in the eye is repeatedly mentioned: Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 7, 5;<br> iv. 15, 1;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 3, 5;<br> iv. 2, 2;<br> v. 5, 2. 4, etc.;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 27, 2. The Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 2, 3, adds the water (''āpaḥ'') in the eye, the upper and the lower lids (''vartanī''), and seven red lines (''lohinyo rājayaḥ'').<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 149.</ref> The desease '''[[अलजि|Alaji]]''' appears to have been an affection of the eyes.

चण्डाल
<u>'''Caṇḍāla,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_951> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 10, 7;<br> 14, 4;<br> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 9;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 12;<br> vi. 1, etc.</ref> '''[[चाण्डाल|Cāṇḍāla]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_951> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 21;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 17, 1;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1, 22.</ref> are the variant forms of the name of a despised caste, which in origin was probably a tribal body,<ref name=fx3_ve1_951> Fick, ''Die sociale Gliederung.'' 204 ''et seq.''</ref> but which in the Brahminical theory was the offspring of [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] athers and Brahmin mothers.<ref name=fx4_ve1_951> Apparently accepted for the Vedic period by Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 217.<br><br>''Cf.'' von Schroeder, ''Indiens Litcratur und Cultur,'' 433.</ref> The references to the caste in he [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās and in the Upaniṣads show clearly hat it was a degraded one, but they yield no particulars. 

चतुष्-पद्
<u>'''Catuṣ-pad,'''</u> ‘quadruped,’ is a regular name for animals from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_952> Rv. i. 49, 3;<br> 94, 5;<br> 119, 1;<br> iii. 62, 14, etc.;<br> Av. iv. 11, 5;<br> x. 8, 21;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, viii. 30;<br> ix. 31;<br> xiv. 8. 25, etc.;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 2;<br> viii. 20, etc.</ref> onwards, being frequently contrasted with '''Dvipad,''' ‘biped.’<ref name=fx2_ve1_952> Rv. x. 117, 8;<br> Av. vi. 107, 1, etc.</ref> Catuṣ-[[पाद|pāda]], as an adjective applying to ''paśavaḥ,'' ‘animals,’ is also found.<ref name=fx3_ve1_952> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 18;<br> vi. 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7, 3, 2;<br> vi. 8, 2, 17, etc.</ref>

चन्द्र
<u>'''1. Candra,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_953> Av. ii. 15, 2;<br> 22, 1;<br> iii. 31, 6, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 28;<br> xxxix. 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 2, 2, 16, etc.</ref> '''[[चन्द्र|Candra]]-mas,'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_953> Rv. i. 105, 1;<br> viii. 82, 8;<br> x. 64, 3;<br> 85, 19;<br> Av. xi. 6, 7;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, i. 28;<br> xxiii. 10. 59, etc.</ref> are the names of the ‘moon,’ the latter occurring from the Rigveda onwards, but the former being first used in this sense by the Atharvaveda. Very little is said about the moon in Vedic literature, except as identified with '''Soma,'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_953> See Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 112, 113. The identification is clearly found in the later parts of the Rigveda.</ref> both alike being described as waxing and waning. Reference is, however, made to the regular changes of the moon, and to its alternation with the sun,<ref name=fx5_ve1_953> Rv. x. 68, 10. ''Cf.'' i. 62, 8;<br> 72, 10.</ref> to which it, as Soma, is declared in the Rigveda to be married.<ref name=fx6_ve1_953> x. 85, 18. 19.</ref> Mention is also made of its disappearance at the time of new moon,<ref name=fx7_ve1_953> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 4, 18;<br> iv. 6, 7, 12;<br> xi. 1, 6, 19;<br> xiv. 4, 2, 13;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 28, 8;<br> perhaps Rv. x. 138, 4.</ref> and of its birth from the light of the sun.<ref name=fx8_ve1_953> Rv. ix. 71, 9;<br> 76, 4;<br> 86, 32;<br> [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]], ii. 9, 2, 12, 1;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 463 ''et seq. Cf.'' [[सूर्य|Sūrya]].</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx9_ve1_953> xix. 9, 10. Av. vi. 128 is also regarded by the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], c. 3, as referring to an eclipse of the moon. See Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 533.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 349, 350, 352.</ref> reference is made to demons eclipsing the moon (''grahāś cāndramāsāḥ'').<br><br>For the phases of the moon, and the month as a measure of time, see '''[[मास|Māsa]].''' For the moon and its mansions, see '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br><br>^4) Rv. x. 55, 5. ''Cf.'' Av. x. 8, 32.

चन्द्र
<u>'''2. Candra'''</u> appears to denote ‘gold’ in a certain number of passages from the Rigveda onwards.<ref name=fx1_ve1_954> Rv. ii. 2, 4;<br> iii. 31, 5;<br> Av. xii. 2, 53;<br> Jaittirīya Saṃhitā, i. 2, 7, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ii. 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iv. 26;<br> xix. 93;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 3, 4, etc. ''Cf.'' the adjective ''candrin'' in Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xx. 37;<br> xxxi. 31.</ref> 

चप्य
<u>'''Capya'''</u> is found in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_955> xix. 88;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 9;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxviii. 3.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_955> xii. 7, 2, 13;<br> 9, 1, 3.</ref> as the name of a sacrificial vessel.

चमस
<u>'''Camasa'''</u> denotes a ‘drinking vessel,’ usually as employed for holding '''Soma''' at the sacrifice. It is frequently mentioned from the Rigveda onwards.<ref name=fx1_ve1_956> Rv. i. 20, 6;<br> 110, 3;<br> viii. 82, 7;<br> x. 16, 8;<br> 68, 8;<br> 96, 9, etc.;<br> Av. vii. 73, 3;<br> xviii. 3, 54;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 13, etc.;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], xi. 2;<br> xii. 38.</ref> It was made of wood (''[[वृक्ष|vṛkṣa]]''),<ref name=fx2_ve1_956> Rv. x. 68, 8.</ref> and is hence called ''dru.''<ref name=fx3_ve1_956> Rv. i. 161, 1.</ref> According to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx4_ve1_956> vii. 2, 11, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 280;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 167, 168.</ref> it was made of '''[[उदुम्बर|Udumbara]]''' wood.

चमू
<u>'''Camū'''</u> is a term of somewhat doubtful sense occurring repeatedly in the Rigveda, and connected with the preparation of Soma. Zimmer<ref name=fx1_ve1_957> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 277, 278.</ref> considers that in the dual it denotes the two boards between which, in his opinion, the Soma was crushed (''cf.'' '''[[अधिषवण|Adhiṣavaṇa]]'''). Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve1_957> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Cf.'' Grassmann, ''Rigveda,'' 1, 15.</ref> however, appears to be right in taking the normal sense to designate a vessel into which the Soma was poured from the press, and Hillebrandt<ref name=fx3_ve1_957> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 164-175.</ref> shows clearly that when it occurs in the plural<ref name=fx4_ve1_957> Rv. iii. 48, 5;<br> viii. 2, 8;<br> 82, 7. 8;<br> ix. 20, 6;<br> 62, 16;<br> 63, 2;<br> 92, 2;<br> 93, 3;<br> 97, 21. 37. 46;<br> 99, 6. 8.</ref> it always has this sense, corresponding to the [[ग्रह|Graha]]-pātras of the later ritual, and that sometimes it is so used in the singular<ref name=fx5_ve1_957> Rv. ix. 107, 18;<br> x. 91, 15.</ref> or dual<ref name=fx6_ve1_957> Rv. ix. 69, 5;<br> 71, 1;<br> 72, 5;<br> 86, 47;<br> 96, 20. 21;<br> 97 2. 48;<br> 103, 4;<br> 107, 10;<br> 108. 10.</ref> also. In some cases,<ref name=fx7_ve1_957> Singular: Rv. v. 51, 4;<br> viii. 4, 4;<br> 76, 10;<br> ix. 46, 3;<br> x. 24, 1. Dual: i. 28, 9;<br> iv. 18, 3;<br> vi. 57, 2;<br> ix. 36, 1.</ref> however, he recognizes its use as denoting the mortar in which the Soma was pressed: he may be right here, as this mode of preparation was probably Indo-Iranian.<ref name=fx8_ve1_957> Hillebrandt, ''op. cit.,'' 1, 158-164.</ref><br><br>In a derivative sense [[चमू|Camū]] appears in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx9_ve1_957> xiii. 8, 2, 1;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 430, n. 1. In [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiv. 22, 19, the sense is doubtful.<br><br>''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 105 ''et seq.''</ref> to denote a trough, either of solid stone or consisting of  bricks, used by the Eastern people to protect the body of the dead from contact with the earth, like modern stone-lined graves or vaults.

चरक
<u>'''Caraka'''</u> primarily denotes a ‘wandering student,’ a sense actually found in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_958> iii. 3, 1.</ref> More especially it denotes the members of a school of the Black [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]], the practices of which are several times referred to with disapproval in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_958> iii. 8, 2, 24 (where the reference is to [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā vi. 3, 9, 6;<br> 10, 2, or some parallel passage);<br> iv. 1, 2, 19;<br> 2, 3, 15;<br> 4, 1, 10;<br> vi. 2, 2, 1. 10;<br> viii. 1, 3, 7;<br> 7, 1, 14. 24.</ref> In the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve1_958> xxx. 18;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 16, 1. Its occurrence in the latter text renders improbable von Schroeder's view, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 188, that [[चरक|Caraka]] included all the Black [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] schools.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 2, 287, n. 2;<br> 3, 256, 257, 454;<br> ''Indian Literature.'' 87;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 212.</ref> the [[चरक|Caraka]] teacher (''Carakācārya'') is enumerated among the sacrificial victims at the Puruṣamedha, or human sacrifice. His dedication there to ill-doing is a clear hint of a ritual feud.

चरक-ब्राह्मण
<u>'''Caraka-brāhmaṇa'''</u> is the name of a work from which Sāyaṇa quotes in his commentary on the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_959> viii. 66, 10;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 41.</ref>

चराचर
<u>'''Carācara'''</u> (‘running about’), a term found classed with '''[[सरीसृप|Sarīsṛpa]]''' in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve1_960> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 13, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 12, 10;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 29.</ref> must apparently denote some kind of animal.

चरु
<u>'''Caru'''</u> designates a ‘kettle’ or ‘pot’ from the Rigveda onwards.<ref name=fx1_ve1_961> Rv. i. 7, 6;<br> vii. 104, 2;<br> ix. 52, 3;<br> x. 86, 18;<br> 167, 4;<br> Av. iv. 7, 4;<br> ix. 5, 6;<br> xi. 1, 16;<br> 3, 18;<br> xviii. 4, 16 ''et seq.,'' etc. It is called ''pañca-bild,'' ‘with five openings,’ in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 1, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, v. 6;<br> xxxii. 6;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 4, 4. 9, etc.</ref> It had a lid (''apidhāna'') and hooks (''[[अङ्क|aṅka]]'') by which it could be hung over a fire.<ref name=fx2_ve1_961> Rv. i. 162, 13;<br> Av. xviii. 4, 53.</ref> It was made of iron or bronze<ref name=fx3_ve1_961> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 4, 5<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 271.</ref>  (''ayasmaya''). The word is also secondarily used<ref name=fx4_ve1_961> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 10, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 4, 7;<br> ii. 5, 3, 4;<br> iii. 2, 3, 1, etc. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Ināische Studien,'' 9, 216.</ref> to denote the contents of the pot, the mess of grain which was cooked in it.

चर्मन्
<u>'''Carman,'''</u> denoting ‘hide’ in general, is a common expression from the Rigveda onwards.<ref name=fx1_ve1_962> Rv. i. 85, 5;<br> 110, 8;<br> 161, 7;<br> iii. 60, 2;<br> iv. 13, 4, etc.;<br> Av. v. 8, 13;<br> x. 9, 2;<br> xi. 1, 9, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 7, 1;<br> vi. 1, 9, 2, etc. The stem ''carma,'' neuter (loc., ''carme''), is found in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 2, 2.</ref> The oxhide was turned to many uses, such as the manufacture of bowstrings, slings, and reins (see '''Go'''). It was especially often employed to place above the boards<ref name=fx2_ve1_962> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 148-150;<br> 181-183.</ref> on which the Soma was pressed with the stones.<ref name=fx3_ve1_962> Rv. x. 94, 9;<br> 116, 4.</ref> It was possibly also used for making skin bags.<ref name=fx4_ve1_962> Rv. x. 106, 10, is so taken by Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben.'' 228, who compares ''Odyssey,'' x. 19.</ref> Carmaṇya denotes leather-work generally in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx5_ve1_962> v. 32. ''Cf. [[परिचर्मण्य|paricarmaṇya]],'' Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, ii. 1.</ref><br><br>The art of tanning hides (''mlā'') was known as early as the Rigveda,<ref name=fx6_ve1_962> viii. 55, 3 (a late hymn).</ref> where also the word for ‘tanner’ (''carmamna'') occurs.<ref name=fx7_ve1_962> viii. 5, 38;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 15;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 13, 1. For the form, ''cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 38, n. 1;<br> p. 249, n. 4.</ref> Details of the process are lacking, but the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx8_ve1_962> ii. 1, 1, 9.</ref> refers to stretching out a hide with pegs (''śañkubhiḥ''), and the Rigveda<ref name=fx9_ve1_962> i. 85, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 228, 253.</ref> mentions the wetting of the hide.

चर्षणि
<u>'''Carṣaṇi,'''</u> used in the plural, denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_963> Rv. i. 86, 5;<br> 184, 4;<br> iii. 43, 2;<br> iv. 7, 4;<br> v. 23, 1;<br> vi. 2, 2;<br> x. 180, 3, etc.</ref> ‘men’ in general or ‘people,’ conceived either as active beings<ref name=fx2_ve1_963> If derived from ''car,'' ‘move,’ which is probable.</ref> or as cultivators<ref name=fx3_ve1_963> If derived from ''kṛṣ,'' ‘plough or ‘till.’</ref> in opposition to nomads. The expression ‘king of men’ (''rājā carṣaṇīnām'') is frequently found.<ref name=fx4_ve1_963> Rv. iii. 10, 1;<br> v. 39, 4;<br> vi. 30, 5;<br> viii. 70, 1;<br> x. 139, 1, etc.</ref> The ‘people’ are  also mentioned in connexion with war.<ref name=fx5_ve1_963> Rv. i. 55, 1;<br> 109, 6;<br> iv. 31, 4;<br> 37, 8;<br> vi. 31, 1, etc.</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx6_ve1_963> xiii. 1, 38.</ref> ‘animals’ (''[[पशु|paśu]]'') and ‘men’ (''[[चर्षणि|carṣaṇi]]'') are spoken of together.<br><br>For the five ''carṣaṇayaḥ,''<ref name=fx7_ve1_963> Rv. v. 86, 2;<br> vii. 15, 2;<br> ix. 101, 9. For the derivation, see Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' 185, and especially 122, 2''a'' (from ''car,'' ‘move’);<br> Monier Williams, Dictionary, ''s.v.'' (from ''kṛṣ,'' ‘plough’).</ref> see '''Pañca Janāsaḥ.'''

चषाल
<u>'''Caṣāla,'''</u> the mortar-shaped top-piece of the sacrificial post ('''[[यूप|Yūpa]]'''), is mentioned from the Rigveda onwards.<ref name=fx1_ve1_964> Rv. i. 162, 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 3, 4, 2, 7;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxvi. 4, etc.;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 11, 8, etc.</ref> In one passage of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_964> v. 2, 1, 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 168, n. 1;<br> 41, 31, n. 1.</ref> it is directed to be made of wheaten dough (''gaudhūma'').

चाक्र
<u>'''Cākra'''</u> is the name of a man, variously styled [[रेवोत्तरस्|Revottaras]] [[स्थपति|Sthapati]] [[पाटव|Pāṭava]] [[चाक्र|Cākra]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_965> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. xii. 8, 1, 17.</ref> and [[रेवोत्तरस्|Revottaras]] [[पाटव|Pāṭava]] [[चाक्र|Cākra]] [[स्थपति|Sthapati]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_965> ''Ibid.,'' xii. 9, 3, 1 ''et seq.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 205207;<br> 10, 85. n. 1;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 123;<br> Eggeling. ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 269 ''et seq.,'' whose version is followed above.</ref> who is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] only. He is there said to have been expelled by the '''Sṛñjayas,''' but to have restored to them their prince '''[[दुष्टरीतु|Duṣṭarītu]]''' despite the opposition of the [[कौरव्य|Kauravya]] king '''[[बल्हिक प्रातिपीय|Balhika Prātipīya]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_965/> He must have been a sage rather than a warrior, as the first passage of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_965/> shows him in the capacity of a teacher only. ''Cf.'' '''[[स्थपति|Sthapati]].'''

चाक्रायण
<u>'''Cākrāyaṇa,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[चक्र|Cakra]],’ is the patronymic of '''Uṣasta''' or '''Uṣasti.'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_966> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 5, 1;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 10, 1;<br> 11, 1.</ref>

चाण्डाल
<u>'''Cāṇḍāla.'''</u> See '''[[चण्डाल|Caṇḍāla]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

चाक्षुष
<u>'''Cākṣuṣa,'''</u> a word occurring once only in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_968> xvi. 7, 7.</ref> is, according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, a patronymic (of Suyāman, a personification). Whitney<ref name=fx2_ve1_968> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 800.</ref> treats it as probably a simple adjective (‘of sight’). 

चातुर्-मास्य
<u>'''Cātur-māsya,'''</u> ‘four-monthly,’ denotes the festival of the Vedic ritual held at the beginning of the three seasons of four months each, into which the Vedic year was artificially divided.<ref name=fx1_ve1_969> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 5, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 9, 5;<br> ii. 2, 2, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 36;<br> ii. 5, 2, 48;<br> 6, 4, 1;<br> v. 2, 3, 10;<br> xiii. 2, 5, 2;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, etc.</ref> It is clear that the sacrifices commenced with the beginning of each season,<ref name=fx2_ve1_969> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 36 (''cf.'' xiv. 1, 1, 28);<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1.</ref> and it is certain that the first of them, the Vaiśvadeva, coincided with the Phālgunī full moon,<ref name=fx3_ve1_969> In the month Phālguna, or February-March.</ref> the second, the Varuṇa-praghāsas, with the Āṣāḍhī full moon,<ref name=fx4_ve1_969> In the month Āṣāḍhā, or JuneJuly.</ref> and the third, the Sāka-[[मेध|medha]], with the Kārttikī full moon.<ref name=fx5_ve1_969> That is, in the month Kārttika, when the moon is in the asterism Kṛttikā: Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 3, 13;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, etc.</ref> There were, however, two alternative datings: the festivals could also be held in the Caitrī, the Śrāvaṇī, and Āgrahāyaṇī (Mārgaśīrṣī) full moons,<ref name=fx6_ve1_969> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 13, 1;<br> 14, 1. 2;<br> 15, 1. These are the fullmoon days in the months [[चैत्र|Caitra]] (March-April), Śrāvaṇa (July-August), and Mārgaśīṛṣa (November-December) respectively.</ref> or in the Vaiśākhī, Bhādrapadī, and Pauṣī full moons.<ref name=fx7_ve1_969> Deva's Paddhati on Kātyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], pp. 430, 450, 497. These are the full-moon days in the months Vaiśākha (April-May), Bhādrapada (August-September), and Pauṣa (December-January) respectively.</ref> Neither of the later datings is found in a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] text, but each may well have been known early, since the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx8_ve1_969> vii. 4, 8, 1. 2.</ref> and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx9_ve1_969> v. 9, 8. 11.</ref> both recognize the full moon in the month [[चैत्र|Caitra]] as an alternative to the full moon in the month Phālguna, for the beginning of the year.<br><br>Jacobi considers that the commencement of the year with the full moon in the asterism [[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]], which is supported by other evidence,<ref name=fx10_ve1_969> ''Indian Antiquary,'' 23, 156 ''et seq.;<br> Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 49, 223 ''et seq.;<br>'' 50, 72-81.</ref> indicates that the year at one time began with the winter solstice with the moon in [[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]], corresponding to the summer solstice when the sun was in [[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]]. These astronomical conditions, he believes, existed in the time of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx11_ve1_969> vii. 103, 9;<br> x. 85, 13. ''Cf. Festgruss an Rudolf von Roth,'' 68 ''et seq.''</ref> and prevailed in the fourth millennium B.C. The alternative  dates would then indicate periods when the winter solstice coincided with the Caitrī or the Vaiśākhī full moon. But Oldenberg<ref name=fx12_ve1_969> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 630 ''et seq.;<br>'' 49, 475, 476;<br> 50, 453-457.</ref> and Thibaut<ref name=fx13_ve1_969> ''Indian Antiquary,'' 24, 86 ''et seq.''</ref> seem clearly right in holding that the coincidence of Phālgunī with the beginning of spring,<ref name=fx14_ve1_969> See [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 2, 6, 8;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 1, 2-4. So the Phālgunī full moon is called ‘the mouth of the seasons (''ṛtūnāṃ mukham'')--''e.g.,'' [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxi. 15, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, viii. 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 6, 9;<br> and the first season is always spring: Śatapaṭha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 3, 8-14;<br> ii. 1, 3, 1;<br> vii. 2, 4, 26;<br> xi. 2, 7, 32;<br> xii. 8, 2, 34;<br> xiii. 5, 4, 28;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 2, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiii. 1. 7, etc. See Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 352.</ref> which is certain, is fatal to this view, and that there is no difficulty in regarding this date as consistent with the date of the winter solstice in the new moon of Māgha, which is given by the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx15_ve1_969> xix. 3.</ref> and which forms the basis of the calculations of the [[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]].<ref name=fx16_ve1_969> Thibaut, ''Astronomie, Astrologie, und Mathematik,'' 17, 18.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 329 ''et seq.;<br>'' Whitney, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, lxxxvi., lxxxvii.;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 1101-1104.</ref> The full moon in Phālguna would be placed about one month and a half after the winter solstice, or, say, in the first week of February, which date, according to Thibaut, may reasonably be deemed to mark the beginning of a new season in India about 800 B.C. At the same time it must be remembered that the date was necessarily artificial, inasmuch as the year was divided into three seasons, each of four months, and the Indian year does not in fact consist of three equal seasons. The variations of the other datings would then not be unnatural if any school wished to defer its spring festival, the Vaiśvadeva, to the time when spring had really manifested itself. See also '''[[संवत्सर|Saṃvatsara]].'''

चान्धनायन
<u>'''Cāndhanāyana'''</u> is the patronymic of '''Ānandaja''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_970> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372, 383.</ref>

चायमान
<u>'''Cāyamāna'''</u> is the patronymic in the Rigveda (vi. 27, 5. 8) of '''Abhyāvartin.''' <br>==Foot Notes==

चाष
<u>'''Cāṣa,'''</u> the ‘blue woodpecker’ (''Coracias indica''), is mentioned in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_972> x. 97, 13.</ref> as well as in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or horse sacrifice, in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_972> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 4;<br> 15, 9;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 23;<br> xxv. 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 92.</ref>

चिच्चिक
<u>'''Ciccika'''</u> is a bird mentioned with the equally unknown '''[[वृषारव|Vṛṣārava]]''' in one hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_973> x. 146, 2.</ref> It may perhaps be compared with the Ciṭaka mentioned by Dārila in his commentary on the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_973> xxvi. 20;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 266.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 90;<br> Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 589.</ref>

चित्र
<u>'''Citra'''</u> is the name of several persons. (''a'') The Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_974> viii. 21, 18.</ref> contains a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’) of a prince [[चित्र|Citra]]. The later legend<ref name=fx2_ve1_974> Bṛhaddevatā, vii. 58 ''et. seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes.</ref> attributes this panegyric to [[सोभरि|Sobhari]], and describes [[चित्र|Citra]] as king of the rats.<br><br>(''b'') [[चित्र|Citra]] [[गाङ्ग्यायनि|Gāṅgyāyani]] or Gārgyāyaṃ is mentioned in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_974/> as a contemporary of '''[[आरुणि|Āruṇi]]''' and '''[[श्वेतकेतु|Śvetaketu]].'''<br><br>(''c'') [[चित्र|Citra]] [[गौश्रायणि|Gauśrāyaṇi]] is mentioned as a teacher in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1b_ve1_974/>

चित्र-रथ
<u>'''Citra-ratha'''</u> (‘having a brilliant car’) is the name of two persons.<br><br>(''a'') It designates an Āryan prince, who, with Arṇa, was defeated by Indra for the [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]]-Yadus on the '''[[सरयु|Sarayu]]''' (perhaps the modern Sarju in Oudh), according to the Rigveda (iv. 30, 18). The locality would accord with the close connexion of [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] and '''[[क्रिवि|Krivi]]''' or '''[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]].''' <br><br>(''b'') [[चित्ररथ|Citraratha]] is also the name of a king for whom the '''Kāpeyas''' performed a special kind of sacrifice (''dvirātra''), with the result, according to the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_975> xx. 12, 5. ''Cf.'' Hopkins. ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 52, 53;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 32;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 68, n.</ref> that in the [[चैत्ररथि|Caitrarathi]] family only one member was a [[क्षत्र|Kṣatra]]-pati, the rest dependents. Apparently this must mean that the Caitrarathis were distinguished from other families of princes by the fact that the chief of the clan received a markedly higher position than in most cases, in which probably the heads of the family were rather an oligarchy than a monarch and his dependents. See '''[[राजन्|Rājan]].'''

चित्रा
<u>'''Citrā.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

चिल्वटि
<u>'''Cilvaṭi'''</u> is the name of an unknown animal in the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 2, 7).<br>==Foot Notes==

चीपुद्रु
<u>'''Cīpudru'''</u> designates some substance mentioned in a hymn of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_978> vi. 127, 2.</ref> as of use in healing. The commentator Sāyaṇa reads Cīpadru, and explains the word as a kind of tree. This interpretation is supported by the fact that the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_978> xxvi. 34.</ref> refers to the employment of splinters of [[पलाश|Palāśa]] wood in the ritual application of this hymn.<ref name=fx3_ve1_978> Av. vi. 127.</ref> Whitney<ref name=fx4_ve1_978> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 376.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 350-352;<br> ''Atharvaveda,'' 62;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 386. The text of Roth and Whitney reads by error ''[[शीपुद्रु|Śīpudru]].''</ref> suggests that the form of the word should be Cīpuḍu.

चुमुरि
<u>'''Cumuri'''</u> is the name of an enemy of '''[[दभीति|Dabhīti]],''' for whom he, along with his friend '''[[धुनि|Dhuni]],''' is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_979> vi. 20, 13;<br> x. 113, 9. In vi. 26, 6, [[चुमुरि|Cumuri]] alone is mentioned, and Dāsas or Dasyus generally are stated to have been subdued for [[दभीति|Dabhīti]] in iv. 30, 21;<br> ii. 13, 9. See also ii. 15, 9;<br> vii. 19, 4.</ref> as having been defeated by Indra. Elsewhere<ref name=fx2_ve1_979> Rv. vi. 18, 8.</ref> the two are spoken of, along with '''[[शम्बर|Śambara]], [[पिप्रु|Pipru]],''' and Śuṣṇa, as having been crushed by Indra, who destroyed their castles. It is impossible to say whether real men or demons are meant, but in favour of  a man being denoted by [[चुमुरि|Cumuri]] is the form of the name, which seems not to be Āryan.<ref name=fx3_ve1_979> Wackernagel, ''Altindische Grammatik,'' 1, xxii.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 275;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology'' p. 162.</ref>

चूड भागवित्ति
<u>'''Cūḍa Bhāgavitti'''</u> (‘descendant of Bhagavitta’) is mentioned in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaṇiṣad<ref name=fx1_ve1_980> vi. 3, 9 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]]=vi. 3, 17. 18 Mādhyaṃdina). The text of the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] has, as usual, Cūla.</ref> as a pupil of '''[[मधुक पैङ्ग्य|Madhuka Paiṅgya]].'''

चूर्ण
<u>'''Cūrṇa'''</u> appears to denote an aromatic powder in the phrase ''[[चूर्ण|cūrṇa]]-[[हस्त|hasta]],'' used of the Apsarases in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (i. 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

चेदि
<u>'''Cedi'''</u> is the name of a people who, with their king '''[[कशु|Kaśu]],''' the [[चैद्य|Caidya]], are mentioned only in a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’), occurring at the end of one hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_982> viii. 5, 37-39.</ref> where their generosity is celebrated as unsurpassed. They occur later in the Epic with the '''Matsyas,''' and lived in Bandela Khaṇḍa (Bundelkhand).<ref name=fx2_ve1_982> Lassen, ''Indische Alterthumskunde,'' 12, 688, n. 3;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 129;<br> Pargiter, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 332;<br> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 402.</ref> In Vedic times they were probably situated in much the same locality.

चेलक शाण्डिल्यायन
<u>'''Celaka Śāṇḍilyāyana'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[शाण्डिल्य|Śāṇḍilya]]'''’) is mentioned as a teacher in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (x. 4, 5, 3).<br>==Foot Notes==

चैकितानेय
<u>'''Caikitāneya'''</u> (‘descendant of Cekitāna’) is mentioned as a teacher in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_984> i. 37, 7;<br> ii. 5, 2.</ref> The Caikitāneyas are also referred to there<ref name=fx2_ve1_984> i. 42, 1.</ref> in connexion with the Sāman which they worshipped. '''Brahmadatta''' [[चैकितानेय|Caikitāneya]] is brought into connexion with the Sāman in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_984> i. 3, 24.</ref> and '''[[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]]''' [[चैकितानेय|Caikitāneya]] is known to the Ṣaḍviṃśa<ref name=fx4_ve1_984> iv. 1.</ref> and [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx5_ve1_984> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373, 384.</ref> The word is a patronymic, formed from  Caikitāna, according to Śaṅkara,<ref name=fx6_ve1_984> On Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> but more probably from Cekitāna,<ref name=fx7_ve1_984> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> a name found in the Epic.

चैकितायन
<u>'''Caikitāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Cikitāyana<ref name=fx1_ve1_985> Śaṅkara on Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 8, 1.</ref> or Cekita,’<ref name=fx2_ve1_985> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> is the patronymic of '''[[दाल्भ्य|Dālbhya]]''' in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_985> i. 8, 1.</ref>

चैत्र
<u>'''Caitra'''</u> is the patronymic of '''[[यज्ञसेन|Yajñasena]]''' in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā (xxi. 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

चैत्र-रथि
<u>'''Caitra-rathi.'''</u> See '''[[चित्ररथ|Citraratha]]''' and '''Satyādhivāka.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

चैत्रियायण
<u>'''Caitriyāyaṇa'''</u> is the patronymic or metronymic of the teacher '''[[यज्ञसेन|Yajñasena]]''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (v. 3, 8, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

चैद्य
<u>'''Caidya.'''</u> See '''Cedi.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

चैलकि
<u>'''Cailaki,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Celaka,'''’ is the patronymic of Jīvala in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ii. 3, 1, 34).<br>==Foot Notes==

चोर
<u>'''Cora,'''</u> ‘thief,’ is only found in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, a late work, in its last book (x. 65). The Vedic terms are '''[[तस्कर|Taskara]] [[तायु|Tāyu]], [[स्तेन|Stena]],''' and '''[[परिपन्थिन्|Paripanthin]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

च्यवतान मारुताश्व
<u>'''Cyavatāna Mārutāśva'''</u> (‘descendant of Marutāśva’) is apparently the name of a prince in a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’), in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_992> v. 33, 9. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3. 155.</ref> Two distinct persons may, however, be meant.

च्यवन
<u>'''Cyavana,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_993> This form is found even in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (iv. 19), regularly in all the Vedic texts other than the Rigveda, and in the Epic.</ref> '''Cyavāna,'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_993> The Rv. has this form throughout.</ref> are variant forms of the name of an ancient [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]], or seer. The Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_993> i. 116, 10;<br> 117, 13;<br> 118, 6;<br> v. 74, 5;<br> vii. 68, 6;<br> 71, 5;<br> x. 39, 4.</ref> represents him as an old decrepit man, to whom the Aśvins restored youth and strength, making him acceptable to his wife, and a husband of maidens.  The legend is given in another form in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx4_ve1_993> iv. 1, 5, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> where [[च्यवन|Cyavana]] is described as wedding [[सुकन्या|Sukanyā]], the daughter of '''[[शर्यात|Śaryāta]].''' He is there called a [[भृगु|Bhṛgu]] or [[आङ्गिरस|Āṅgirasa]], and is represented as having been rejuvenated by immersion in a pond--the first occurrence of a motive, later very common in Oriental literature. Another legend about Cyavāna is apparently alluded to in an obscure hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx5_ve1_993> x. 61, 1-3.</ref> where he seems to be opposed to the '''[[पक्थ|Paktha]]''' prince '''[[तूर्वयाण|Tūrvayāṇa]],''' an Indra worshipper, while Cyavāna seems to have been specially connected with the Aśvins. This explanation of the hymn, suggested by Pischel,<ref name=fx6_ve1_993> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 71-77;<br> accepted by Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 465.</ref> is corroborated by the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx7_ve1_993> iii. 121-128;<br> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 11, cxlvi;<br> 26, 43 ''et seq.''</ref> which relates that '''Vidanvant,''' another son of [[भृगु|Bhṛgu]], supported [[च्यवन|Cyavana]] against Indra, who was angry with him for sacrificing to the Aśvins; it is also noteworthy that the Aśvins appear in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx8_ve1_993> iv. 1, 5, 13 ''et seq.''</ref> as obtaining a share in the sacrifice on the suggestion of [[सुकन्या|Sukanyā]]. But a reconciliation of Indra and [[च्यवन|Cyavana]] must have taken place, because the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx9_ve1_993> viii. 21, 4;<br> Pischel, ''op. cit.,'' 1, 75.</ref> relates the inauguration of '''[[शार्यात|Śāryāta]]''' by [[च्यवन|Cyavana]] with the great Indra consecration (''aindreṇa mahābhiṣekeṇa''). In the Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇā<ref name=fx10_ve1_993> xiii. 5, 12;<br> xix. 3, 6;<br> xiv. 6, 10;<br> xi. 8, 11.<br><br>''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 243, 250-254;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 156;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 51, 52;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 26, 43 ''et seq.;<br> Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 56, 57.</ref> [[च्यवन|Cyavana]] is mentioned as a seer of Sāmans or Chants.

छग
<u>'''Chaga'''</u> is the name of the ‘goat’ in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (v. 6, 22, 1). ''Cf.'' '''Aja''' and '''[[छाग|Chāga]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

छदिस्
<u>'''Chadis'''</u> is used once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_995> x. 85, 10 (of Sūryā's bridal car).</ref> and not rarely later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_995> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 9, 4;<br> 10, 5. 7;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, v. 28;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 29;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 3, 9, etc.</ref> to denote the covering of a wagon or the thatch of a house, or  something analogous to these. Weber<ref name=fx3_ve1_995> ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 208.</ref> thinks that in one passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_995> iii. 7, 3.</ref> the word designates a constellation, and Whitney,<ref name=fx5_ve1_995> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 95.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 336.</ref> who does not decide whether that interpretation is necessary, suggests that the constellation  Aquarii may be meant, sicne the next verse mentions '''[[विचृतौ|Vicṛtau]],''' which is the constellation  and  Scorpionis, and is not far from Aquarius. See also '''[[छर्दिस्|Chardis]].'''

छन्दस्
<u>'''1. Chandas'''</u> in the Rigveda usually denotes a ‘song of praise’ or ‘hymn.’<ref name=fx1_ve1_996> Rv. x. 85, 8 (an obscure verse);<br> 114, 5;<br> Av. iv. 34, 1;<br> v. 26, 5;<br> vi. 124, 1;<br> xi. 7, 8, etc.</ref> The original sense of the word, as derived from the verb ''chand,'' ‘to please,’ was probably ‘attractive spell,’ ‘magic hymn,’<ref name=fx2_ve1_996> ''Cf.'' Roth in St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> which prevailed on the gods. In a very late hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx3_ve1_996> Rv. x. 90, 9.</ref> as well as in one of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx4_ve1_996> Av. xi. 7, 24.</ref> the word is mentioned in the plural (''chandāṃsi''), beside Ṛc (''ṛcaḥ''), Sāman (''sāmāni''), and [[यजुस्|Yajus]], and seems to retain its original meaning, not improbably with reference to the magical subject-matter of the Atharvaveda. From denoting a (metrical) hymn it comes to mean ‘metre’ in a very late verse of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx5_ve1_996> x. 14, 16.</ref> in which the ‘Gāyatrī, the Triṣṭubh, and all (''sarvā'') the metres (''chandāṃsi'') are mentioned. In the later Saṃhitās three<ref name=fx6_ve1_996> Av. xviii. 1, 17;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, i. 27, etc.</ref> or seven<ref name=fx7_ve1_996> Av. viii. 9, 17. 19, etc.</ref> metres are enumerated, and in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx8_ve1_996> viii. 3, 3, 6, etc.</ref> eight. By the time of the Rigveda Prātiśākhya<ref name=fx9_ve1_996> xvi. 1 ''et seq. Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, xcv. ''et seq.''</ref> the metres were subjected to a detailed examination, though much earlier references are found to the number of syllables in the several metres.<ref name=fx10_ve1_996> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiv. 4;<br> Jaittirīya Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 2, 7.</ref> Later the word definitely denotes a Vedic text generally, as in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx11_ve1_996> xi. 5, 7, 3. So Gobhila [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 3, 4. 15, etc.</ref> 

छन्दस्
<u>'''2. Chandas'''</u> occurs in one passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_997> iii. 12, 3.</ref> in the adjectival compound ''[[बृहच्-छन्दस्|bṛhac-chandas]],'' which is used of a house, and must mean ‘having a large roof.’ Bloomfield<ref name=fx2_ve1_997> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 345;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 150.</ref> accepts the reading as correct, but Whitney<ref name=fx3_ve1_997> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 105.</ref> considers emendation to '''[[छदिस्|Chadis]]''' necessary.

छन्दो-ग
<u>'''Chando-ga,'''</u> ‘metre-singing,’ is the term applied to reciters of the Sāmans, no doubt because these chants were sung according to their order in the Chandaārcika of the [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]]. It is only found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_998> x. 5, 2, 10.</ref> and often in the Sūtras.<ref name=fx2_ve1_998> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 2;<br> xxii. 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 8, 33;<br> xiii. 1, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Go7ttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen,'' 1908, 720.</ref>

छर्दिस्
<u>'''Chardis'''</u> occurs often in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_999> i. 48, 15;<br> 114, 5;<br> vi. 15, 3;<br> 46, 9. 12, etc.</ref> and occasionally later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_999> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 9, 2;<br> 3, 6, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 19;<br> xiv. 12.</ref> denoting a secure dwelling-place. The word appears to be incorrectly written, because the metre shows that the first syllable is always short. Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_999> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Oldenberg, ''Prolegomena,'' 477.</ref> accordingly suggested that '''[[छदिस्|Chadis]]''' should be read instead. But [[छदिस्|Chadis]] means ‘roof,’ while [[छर्दिस्|Chardis]] never has that sense. Bartholomae<ref name=fx4_ve1_999> ''Studien,'' 1, 47;<br> 2, 58. ''Cf.'' Wackernagel, ''Altindische Grammatik,'' 1, xii., n. 2;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 55, 312.</ref> is therefore probably right in suggesting some other form, such as Chaḍis.

छाग
<u>'''Chāga,'''</u> ‘goat,’ is found in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1000> i. 162, 3.</ref> and not rarely later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1000> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 89;<br> xxi. 40. 41;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 3, 4;<br> v. 1, 3, 14;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 2.</ref> See '''Aja''' and '''[[छग|Chaga]].''' 

जगत्
<u>'''Jagat,'''</u> ‘moving,’ is applied sometimes in the Atharvaveda, and later to the domestic animals in particular, as opposed to wild animals (''śvapad'').<ref name=fx1_ve1_1001> Av. viii. 5, 11, etc.</ref> Occasionally the cow is mentioned separately, when the word ''[[जगत्|jagat]]'' covers the rest of the domesticated animals.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1001> Av. i. 31, 4;<br> x. 1, 29;<br> xix. 47, 10;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 59. In the Rv. the sense of animal in general is usually sufficient;<br> but ''cf. jagatī'' in i. 157, 5;<br> vi. 72, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 150, n.</ref>

जङ्गिड
<u>'''Jaṅgiḍa'''</u> is the name of a healing plant mentioned in the hymns of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1002> ii. 4;<br> xix. 34. 35.</ref> It was used as an amulet against the diseases, or symptoms of disease, '''[[तक्मन्|Takman]], [[बलास|Balāsa]], [[आशरीक|Āśarīka]], Viśarīka, [[पृष्ट्य्आमय|Pṛṣṭyāmaya]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1002> Av. xix. 34, 10.</ref> fevers and rheumatic pains, '''[[विष्कन्ध|Viṣkandha]]''' and '''[[संस्कन्ध|Saṃskandha]],'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1002> Av. ii. 4, 1;<br> xix. 34, 1. 5.</ref> '''[[जम्भ|Jambha]],''' and so on. But it is also regarded as a specific against all diseases, and as the best of healing powers.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1002> Av. xix. 34, 9. 7.</ref> It is said to be produced from the juices (''rasa'') of ploughing (''[[कृषि|kṛṣi]]''),<ref name=fx5_ve1_1002> Av. ii. 4, 5.</ref> but this need only mean that it grew in cultivated land, not that it was itself cultivated. What plant the name designates is quite uncertain, for it disappears in the later literature. Caland<ref name=fx6_ve1_1002> ''Altindisches Zauberritual,'' 15, rendering [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 15.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 433;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 42;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 141;<br> Grohmann, ''ibid.,'' 9, 417;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 65, 66, 390.</ref> takes it in the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] to be the ''Terminalia arjuneya.''

जतू
<u>'''Jatū,'''</u> the ‘bat,’ occurs in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1003> ix. 2, 22.</ref> and is mentioned as one of the victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or horse sacrifice, in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1003> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 25. 26.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 86.</ref> 

जन
<u>'''Jana,'''</u> besides meaning ‘man’ as an individual, with a tendency to the collective sense, commonly denotes a ‘people’ or ‘tribe’ in the Rigveda and later. Thus, the ‘five tribes’ ('''Panca Janāḥ''' or '''Janāsaḥ''') are frequently referred to, and in one hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1004> viii. 6, 46. 48.</ref> the ‘people of Yadu’ (''[[याद्व|yādva]] jana'') and the '''Yadus''' (''yādvāḥ'') are synonymous. Again, the king (''[[राजन्|rājan]]'') is described as ‘protector (''[[गोपा|gopā]]'') of the people (''janasya''),’<ref name=fx2_ve1_1004> Rv. iii. 43, 5. So Soma is called ''[[गोपति|gopati]] janasya,'' ‘protector of the people,’ Rv. ix. 35, 5.</ref> and there are other references to king and Jana.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1004> Rv. v. 58, 4.</ref> The people of the '''Bharatas''' (''[[भारत|bhārata]] jana'') is also mentioned;<ref name=fx4_ve1_1004> Rv. iii. 53, 12. See also '''[[भरत|Bharata]].'''<br><br>''Cf.'' also x. 174, 5 = Av. i. 29, 6.</ref> there is no ground to assume with Hopkins<ref name=fx5_ve1_1004> ''Religions of India,'' 26, 27. It is true that the Bharatas are called a ''gavyan grāmaḥ,'' ‘a horde eager for booty,’ in Rv. iii. 33, 11;<br> but [[ग्राम|Grāma]] has there merely a general application. Seen. 10.</ref> that Jana in this case means a clan or horde ('''[[ग्राम|Grāma]]'''), as distinguished from a people.<br><br>It is difficult to say exactly how a people was divided. Zimmer<ref name=fx6_ve1_1004> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 159, 160.</ref> argues from a passage in the Rigveda<ref name=fx7_ve1_1004> ii. 26, 3.</ref> that a people was divided into cantons ('''[[विश्|Viś]]'''), cantons into joint families or clans, or village communities ('''[[ग्राम|Grāma]], [[वृजन|Vṛjana]]'''), and these again into single families. He thinks that the four divisions are reflected in the passage in question. by Jana, [[विश्|Viś]], [[जन्मन्|Janman]], and Putrāḥ, or sons, and argues that each village community was originally founded on relationship. But it is very doubtful whether this precise division of the people can be pressed. The division of the Jana into several [[विश्|Viś]] may be regarded as probable, for it is supported by the evidence of another passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx8_ve1_1004> x. 84, 4. ''Viśaḥ'' may have the same sense in several other passages--iv. 24, 4;<br> v. 61, 1;<br> vi. 26, 1;<br> vii. 79, 2;<br> viii. 12, 29--but it need not necessarily bear this sense. But in x. 91, 2, there is a clear contrast between [[विश्|Viś]] and Jana.</ref> which mentions the [[विश्|Viś]] as a unit of the fighting men, and thus shows that, as in Homeric times and in ancient Germany, relationship was deemed a good principle of military arrangement. But the subdivision of the [[विश्|Viś]] into several Grāmas is very doubtful. Zimmer<ref name=fx9_ve1_1004> ''Op. cit.,'' 161. He also relies on Rv. v. 53, 11, where the Maruts are divided into ''[[शर्ध|śardha]], [[व्रात|vrāta]],'' and ''gaṇa;<br>'' but these words are vague.</ref> admits that neither [[ग्राम|Grāma]]<ref name=fx10_ve1_1004> Rv. iii. 33. 11. See n. 5.</ref>  nor '''[[वृजन|Vṛjana]]'''<ref name=fx11_ve1_1004> Rv. vii. 32, 27;<br> x. 42, 10.</ref> has the special sense of a subdivision of the [[विश्|Viś]] when used for war, for both words only denote generally an armed host. He finds other designations of the village host in '''Vrā'''<ref name=fx12_ve1_1004> Rv. i. 126, 5 (''viśyā iva vrāḥ'').</ref> and in '''Vrāja,'''<ref name=fx13_ve1_1004> Rv. x. 179, 2=Av. vii. 72, 2.</ref> but it is sufficient to say that the former passage is of extremely doubtful import,<ref name=fx14_ve1_1004> ''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 121, 319.</ref> and that the latter has no reference to war at all. It is therefore impossible to state in what exact relation the [[ग्राम|Grāma]] in Vedic times stood to the [[विश्|Viś]] or to the family (Kula or [[गोत्र|Gotra]]). The confusion is increased by the vagueness of the sense of both [[ग्राम|Grāma]] and [[विश्|Viś]]. If the latter be regarded as a local division, then no doubt the [[ग्राम|Grāma]] must have been a part of a district; but if a [[विश्|Viś]] was a unit of relationship, then a [[ग्राम|Grāma]] may have contained families of different Viśes, or may have sometimes coincided with a [[विश्|Viś]], or have contained only a part of a [[विश्|Viś]]. But in any case the original state of affairs must have been greatly modified by the rise of the system of caste, and the substitution of a hierarchical for a political point of view. The elements of the people were represented by the family--either as an individual family inhabiting one home ('''Kula'''), and consisting often, no doubt, of a joint family of brothers, or as a patriarchal family of sons who still lived with their father--and by the clan, the later '''[[गोत्र|Gotra]],''' which included all those who claimed a common ancestor. The [[गोत्र|Gotra]] may be regarded as roughly corresponding to the Latin ''gens'' and the Greek , and possibly the [[विश्|Viś]] may be the equivalent of the ''curia'' and, and the Jana of the ''tribus'' and  or .<ref name=fx15_ve1_1004> ''Cf. Iliad,'' 2, 362.</ref> These three divisions may also be seen in the [[विश्|Viś]], Zantu, and Daqyu of the Iranian world, where the use of [[विश्|Viś]] suggests that in the Indian [[विश्|Viś]] a relationship based on blood rather than locality is meant--and perhaps even in the ''vicus, pagus,'' and ''civitas'' of the old German polity described in the Germania<ref name=fx16_ve1_1004> Chap. vii. Zimmer gives other equations, for which ''cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 393 ''et seq.'' The exact parallelism cannot in any case be pressed.</ref> of Tacitus. The family in some form appears as the third element of the Jana in a passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx17_ve1_1004> x. 91, 2, where ''janaṃ janam'' and ''viśaṃ viśam'' occur, and where a contrast must be meant.</ref> where the house (''[[गृह|gṛha]]'') is  contrasted with the Jana and the [[विश्|Viś]]. Possibly, too, another passage<ref name=fx18_ve1_1004> Rv. vii. 82, 1.</ref> contrasts the ''adhvara,'' or family sacrifice, with that of the Jana or [[विश्|Viś]], rather than, as Zimmer<ref name=fx19_ve1_1004> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 435.</ref> thinks, the village with the two larger units. But it is significant of the particularism of the Vedic Indians that while the king maintained a fire which might be regarded as the sacred fire of the tribe, there is no sure trace<ref name=fx20_ve1_1004> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 126.<br><br>''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 158;<br> von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 32, 33;<br> Jolly, ''Zeitschrift der Dcutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 50, 512 ''et seq.''</ref> of any intermediate cult between that of the king and that of the individual householder. The real elements in the state are the [[गोत्र|Gotra]] and the Jana, just as ultimately the ''gens'' and ''tribus,'' the  and  are alone important. It may be that [[विश्|Viś]] sometimes represents in the older texts what later was known as the [[गोत्र|Gotra]]. See '''[[विश्|Viś]].'''<br><br>This appears clearly when the constitution of society in the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] period is considered. The tribe or people still exists, and is presupposed, but the division into [[विश्|Viś]] disappears. The real division is now the separate castes ('''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]]'''), but the numerous sections into which each of them is divided appear to be based in part on the ancient [[गोत्र|Gotra]].

जन शार्करक्ष्य
<u>'''2. Jana Śārkarakṣya'''</u> (‘descendant of '''Śarkarakṣa'''’) is mentioned as a teacher in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (x. 6, 1, 1 ''et seq.'') and the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (v. 11, 1; 15, 1). He was a contemporary of '''[[अश्वपति|Aśvapati]] [[कैकेय|Kaikeya]],''' and of '''Aruṇa [[औपवेशि|Aupaveśi]]''' and his son '''[[उद्दालक आरुणि|Uddālaka Āruṇi]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

जनक
<u>'''Janaka,'''</u> king of [[विदेह|Videha]], plays a considerable part in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1006> xi. 3, 1, 2;<br> 4, 3, 20;<br> 6, 2, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> and the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_1006> iii. 1, 1;<br> iv. 1, 1;<br> 2, 1;<br> 4, 7;<br> v. 14, 8.</ref> as well as in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1006> i. 19, 2 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 23, 329);<br> ii. 76 (''ibid.,'' 15, 238).</ref> and the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_1006> iv. 1.</ref> He was a contemporary of '''[[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]] [[वाज|Vāja]]-  saneya,'''<ref name=fx5_ve1_1006> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 3, 1, 2;<br> 4, 3, 20;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> of '''[[श्वेतकेतु|Śvetaketu]] [[आरुणेय|Āruṇeya]],''' and of other sages.<ref name=fx6_ve1_1006> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 6, 2, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> He had become famous for his generosity and his interest in the discussion of the nature of [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], as ultimate basis of reality, in the life-time of '''[[अजातशत्रु|Ajātaśatru]]''' of [[काशि|Kāśi]].<ref name=fx7_ve1_1006> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1, 1.</ref> It is significant that he maintained a close intercourse with the Brahmins of the Kuru-Pañcālas, such as [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]] and [[श्वेतकेतु|Śvetaketu]]; for this indicates that the home of the philosophy of the Upaniṣads was in the Kuru-[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]] country rather than in the east. There is a statement in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx8_ve1_1006> xi. 6, 2, 10.</ref> that he became a Brahmin (''brahmā''). This does not, however, signify a change of caste, but merely that in knowledge he became a Brahmin (see '''[[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]'''). [[जनक|Janaka]] is occasionally mentioned in later texts: in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx9_ve1_1006> iii. 10, 9, 9.</ref> he has already become quite mythical; in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx10_ve1_1006> xvi. 26, 7.</ref> a ''sapta-rātra'' or seven nights' rite is ascribed to him.<br><br>It is natural to attempt to date [[जनक|Janaka]] by his being a contemporary of [[अजातशत्रु|Ajātaśatru]], and by identifying the latter with the Ajātasattu of the Pāli texts:<ref name=fx11_ve1_1006> Vincent Smith, ''Early History of India,'' 26 ''et seq.''</ref> this would make the end of the sixth century B.C. the approximate date of [[जनक|Janaka]].<ref name=fx12_ve1_1006> Hoernle, ''Osteology,'' 106.</ref> But it is very doubtful whether this identification can be supported: [[अजातशत्रु|Ajātaśatru]] was king of [[काशि|Kāśi]], whereas Ajātasattu was king of [[मगध|Magadha]], and his only connexion with [[काशि|Kāśi]] was through his marriage with the daughter of Pasenadi of [[कोसल|Kosala]].<ref name=fx13_ve1_1006> Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 3 ''et seq.''</ref> Moreover, the acceptance of this chronology would be difficult to reconcile with the history of the development of thought; for it would make the rise of Buddhism contemporaneous with the Upaniṣads, whereas it is reasonably certain that the older Upaniṣads preceded Buddhism.<ref name=fx14_ve1_1006> See ''e.g.,'' von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur and Cultur,'' 243;<br> Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 224;<br> Deussen, ''Philosophy of the Upaniṣads,'' 23 ''et seq.;<br>'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 25, 29.</ref> Nor do the Vedic texts know anything of Bimbisāra or Pasenadi, or any of the other princes famed in Buddhist records. <br><br>The identification<ref name=fx15_ve1_1006> ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 135;<br> Von Schroeder, ''op. cit.,'' 189;<br> Macdonell, ''op. cit.,'' 214.</ref> of [[जनक|Janaka]] of [[विदेह|Videha]] and the father of [[सीता|Sītā]] is less open to objection, but it cannot be proved, and is somewhat doubtful. In the Sūtras [[जनक|Janaka]] appears as an ancient king who knew of a time when wifely honour was less respected than later.<ref name=fx16_ve1_1006> Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 48.<br><br>''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 426 ''et seq.;<br>'' Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 421 ''et seq.;<br>'' Von Schroeder, ''op. cit.,'' 187-189;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 175, 231;<br> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 31, n., who properly emphasizes the difficulty of attaching much importance to the names of the leaders of the thought of the Upaniṣads.</ref>

जनता
<u>'''Janatā,'''</u> a word frequently found in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_1007> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 1, 4;<br> 6, 4;<br> 3, 4, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ix. 17;<br> Av. v. 18, 12, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1007> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 6, 1;<br> ii. 3, 1, 3;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7. 9;<br> iii. 31;<br> v. 9, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 153, n.</ref> denotes the people as a community (''cf.'' '''[[सभा|Sabhā]]''') or as a religious unit.

जन-पद
<u>'''Jana-pada'''</u> in the Brāhmaṇas denotes both the ‘people,’ as opposed to the king,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1008> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 14 (plural);<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 2, 17.</ref> and the ‘land’ or ‘relam.’<ref name=fx2_ve1_1008> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 3, 9, 9;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1, 20;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 11, 5;<br> viii. 1, 5.</ref> The ‘subjects’ are also denoted by the adjectival ''[[जानपद|jānapada]].''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1008> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 5, 1, 20.</ref>

जनम्-एजय
<u>'''1. Janam-ejaya'''</u> (‘man-impelling’) is the name of a king, a '''[[पारिक्षित|Pārikṣita]],'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_1009> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 34;<br> viii. 11. 21;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 8, 27, etc.</ref> famous towards the end of the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] period. He is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1009> xi. 5, 5, 13.</ref> as owning horses which when wearied were refreshed with sweet drinks, and as a performer of the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or horse sacrifice.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1009> xiii. 5, 4, 1-3.</ref> His capital, according to a [[गाथा|Gāthā]] quoted in the Śatapatha<ref name=fx4_ve1_1009> xiii. 5, 4, 2.</ref> and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1009> viii. 21.</ref> was '''[[आसन्दीवन्त्|Āsandīvant]].''' His brothers '''[[उग्रसेन|Ugrasena]], [[भीमसेन|Bhīmasena]],''' and '''[[श्रुतसेन|Śrutasena]]''' are mentioned as having  by the horse sacrifice purified themselves from sin. The priest who performed the sacrifice for him was '''[[इन्द्रोत|Indrota]] Daivāpi [[शौनक|Śaunaka]].'''<ref name=fx6_ve1_1009> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 1;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ''loe. cit.''</ref> On the other hand the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx7_ve1_1009> viii. 21. ''Cf.'' iv. 27;<br> vii. 34.</ref> which also mentions his [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], names '''[[तुर कावषेय|Tura Kāvaṣeya]]''' as his priest. It also contains an obscure tale stating that at one sacrifice of his he did not employ the '''Kaśyapas,''' but the '''Bhūtavīras,''' being, however, induced by the '''Asitamṛgas''' to have recourse to the Kaśyapas again.<ref name=fx8_ve1_1009> vii. 27. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 204;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 438, n. 229;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 43, 345, n.</ref> He was a '''Kuru''' prince; see '''[[परिक्षित्|Parikṣit]].''' The Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx9_ve1_1009>i. 2, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 123125;<br> 134-136;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 37, 65 ''et seq.;<br>'' 42, 239;<br> Pargiter, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1910, 28 ''et seq.''</ref> tells an absurd tale about him, evidently as of an ancient hero.

जनम्-एजय
<u>'''2. Janam-ejaya'''</u> is in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1010> xxv. 15, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 35.</ref> the name of a priest who officiated at the snake sacrifice.

जन-श्रुत
<u>'''Jana-śruta'''</u> (‘famed among men’) '''[[काण्ड्विय|Kāṇḍviya]]''' is the name of a pupil of '''Hṛtsvāśaya,''' mentioned in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 40, 2), and of [[वारक्य|Vārakya]], a pupil of '''[[जयन्त|Jayanta]],''' referred to in the same [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 41, 1; iv. 17, 1). ''Cf.'' '''[[जानश्रुति|Jānaśruti]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

जनि
<u>'''Jani, Janī.'''</u>--These words appear to denote ‘wife,’ usually applying to her in relation to her husband ('''Pati'''). The more general sense of ‘woman’ is doubtful; for when Uṣas is called a fair '''Janī,'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_1012> Rv. iv. 52, 1.</ref> ‘wife’ may be meant, and the other passage<ref name=fx2_ve1_1012> v. 61, 3.</ref> cited for this sense by Delbrück,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1012> ''Die indogermanischen Verwandschaftsnamen,'' 413.</ref> which refers to the begetting of childern, seems to demand the sense of ‘wives.’ Since the words usually appear in the plural,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1012> i. 85, 1;<br> iv. 5, 5;<br> 19, 5;<br> vii. 18, 2;<br> 26, 3;<br> ix. 86, 32;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xii. 35;<br> xx. 40. 43, etc. ''Cf.'' Rv. x. 43, 1. In x. 110, 5, the phrase is ''patibhyo na janayaḥ,'' where both plurals may be generic</ref> it is possible they may  refer not to ‘wives’ proper, but to Hetairai. This is, however, rendered unlikely because the Rigveda<ref name=fx5_ve1_1012> x. 18, 8. ''Cf. janitvana'' in viii. 2, 42.</ref> uses the phrase ''patyur janitvam,'' denoting ‘wifehood to a husband,’ as well as the expression ''janayo na patnīḥ,''<ref name=fx6_ve1_1012> i. 62, 10;<br> 186, 7.</ref> ‘like wives (who are) mistresses,’<ref name=fx7_ve1_1012> The distinction of sense was probably this: ''jani'' meant ‘wife,’ as bearing children (from ''jan,'' ‘beget’), while ''[[पत्नी|patnī]]'' was ‘wife,’ as being mistress of the house (feminine of ''pati,'' ‘lord,’ ‘husband’).</ref> besides containing passages in which the word has reference to marriage.<ref name=fx8_ve1_1012> v. 61, 3. So in x. 40, 10, the word seems certainly to refer to marriage.</ref> The singular occurs in the dialogue of Yama and Yamī.<ref name=fx9_ve1_1012> x. 10, 3.</ref>

जनितृ
<u>'''Janitṛ'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_1013> Rv. i. 129, 11;<br> 164, 33;<br> iii. 1, 10;<br> 54, 9, etc.;<br> Av. iv. 1, 7;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 87, etc.</ref> and '''Janitrī'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1013> Rv. iii. 48, 2;<br> 54, 14;<br> Av. vi. 110, 13;<br> ix. 5, 30, etc.</ref> are frequent words, in the Rigveda and later, for ‘father’ and ‘mother’ regarded as the ‘begetter’ and the ‘bearer’ respectively of the child. See '''[[पितृ|Pitṛ]], [[मातृ|Mātṛ]].'''

जन्तु
<u>'''Jantu,'''</u> besides the general sense of ‘man,’ has also in a few passages<ref name=fx1_ve1_1014> Rv. 1. 94, 5;<br> x. 140, 4.</ref> the more restricted sense of ‘follower’ or ‘subject.’ The ‘followers of '''[[श्वैत्रेय|Śvaitreya]]'''’<ref name=fx2_ve1_1014> Rv. v. 19, 3.</ref> may be compared with the ‘subjects (''viśaḥ'') of '''[[तृणस्कन्द|Tṛṇaskanda]].'''’<ref name=fx3_ve1_1014> Rv. i. 172, 3.</ref>

जन्मन्
<u>'''Janman'''</u> appears to have the sense of ‘relations’ in two passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1015> iii. 15, 2;<br> ii. 26, 3 (where ''janena, viśā, janmanā, putraiḥ,'' is the series).<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 160, and see '''Jana''' and '''[[विश्|Viś]].'''</ref> being used collectively in the second of them.

जन्य
<u>'''Janya'''</u> has in the Rigveda (iv. 38, 6) and the Atharvaveda (xi. 8, 1) the special sense of bridesman.’<br>==Foot Notes==

जबाला
<u>'''Jabālā'''</u> is the name of the mother of an illegitimate son, '''[[सत्यकाम|Satyakāma]],''' in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iv. 4, 1. 2. 4). <br>==Foot Notes==

जभ्य
<u>'''Jabhya,'''</u> ‘snapper,’ denotes in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1018> vi. 50, 2. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 237.</ref> an insect destructive to grain.

जमद्-अग्नि
<u>'''Jamad-agni'''</u> is one of the somewhat mythical sages of the Rigveda, where he is frequently mentioned. In some passages<ref name=fx1_ve1_1019> Rv. iii. 62, 18;<br> viii. 101, 8;<br> ix. 62, 24;<br> 65, 25.</ref> his name occurs in such a way as to indicate that he is the author of the hymn; once<ref name=fx2_ve1_1019> Rv. x. 167, 4.</ref> he is thus associated with '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]].''' In other passages<ref name=fx3_ve1_1019> Rv. vii. 96, 3;<br> ix. 97, 51.</ref> he is merely referred to, and the Jamadagnis are mentioned once.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1019> Rv. iii. 53, 15. 16.</ref> In the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1019> ii. 32, 3 (''cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iv. 36;<br> [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 1);<br> iv. 29, 3;<br> v. 28, 7;<br> vi. 137, 1;<br> xviii. 3, 15. 16.</ref> as well as the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx6_ve1_1019> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 12, 4;<br> iii. 1, 7, 3;<br> 3, 5, 2;<br> v. 2, 10, 5;<br> 4, 11, 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 7, 19;<br> iv. 2, 9;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvi. 19;<br> xx. 9;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 62;<br> xiii. 56.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx7_ve1_1019> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 4, 14;<br> xiii. 5, 15;<br> xxi. 10, 5-7;<br> xxii. 7, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 16;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 2, 2, 14;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 9, 7;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 2, 4;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 11;<br> iv. 3, 1, etc.</ref> he is quite a frequent figure. Here he appears as a friend of [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]<ref name=fx8_ve1_1019> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 7, 3;<br> v. 4, 11, 3;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 15.</ref> and a rival of '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]].'''<ref name=fx9_ve1_1019> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> He owed his prosperity to his ''catūrātra,'' or ‘four-night’ ritual, with which his family were also very successful.<ref name=fx10_ve1_1019> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxi. 10, 5-7.</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx11_ve1_1019> ii. 32, 3;<br> vi. 137, 1.</ref> [[जमद्अग्नि|Jamadagni]] is connected with '''Atri''' and '''[[कण्व|Kaṇva]],''' as well as '''[[असित|Asita]]''' and '''Vitahavya.''' He was [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]] priest at the proposed sacrifice of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]].'''<ref name=fx12_ve1_1019> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 16.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connscticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 53, 54;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 319;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 95.</ref>

जम्भ
<u>'''Jambha'''</u> occurs twice in the Atharvaveda as the name of a disease or a demon of disease. In one passage<ref name=fx1_ve1_1020> ii. 4, 2.</ref> it is said to be cured by the '''[[जङ्गिड|Jaṅgiḍa]]''' plant; in the other<ref name=fx2_ve1_1020> viii. 1, 16.</ref> it is described as ''samhanuḥ,'' ‘bringing the jaws together.’ Weber<ref name=fx3_ve1_1020> ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 142.</ref> argued from  the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_1020> xxxii. 1.</ref> that it was a child's ailment, especially ‘teething.’ Bloomfield<ref name=fx5_ve1_1020> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 283.</ref> considers it to mean ‘convulsions,’ while Caland<ref name=fx6_ve1_1020> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgen ländischen Gesellschaft,'' 53, 224;<br> ''Altindisches Zauberritual,'' 103.</ref> thinks it denotes ‘tetanus.’ Whitney<ref name=fx7_ve1_1020> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 42.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 392.</ref> decides for ‘lockjaw’ or ‘convulsions.’

जम्भक
<u>'''Jambhaka,'''</u> as the name of a demon, presumably identical with the demon causing '''[[जम्भ|Jambha]],''' is mentioned in the [[वाज|Vāja]] saneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1021> xxx. 16.</ref> and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1021> xii. 25. ''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āranyaka,'' 67, n. 7.</ref>

जयक लौहित्य
<u>'''Jayaka Lauhitya'''</u> (‘descendant of Lohita’) is mentioned in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 42, 1) as a pupil of '''[[यशस्विन् जयन्त लौहित्य|Yaśasvin <a class="pada_vei" href="जयन्त">Jayanta]] Lauhitya».'''<br>==Foot Notes==

जयन्त
<u>'''Jayanta'''</u> is the name of several teachers in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]:<br><br>(''a'') [[जयन्त|Jayanta]] [[पाराशर्य|Pārāśarya]] (‘descendant of '''[[पराशर|Parāśara]]'''’) is mentioned as a pupil of '''Vipaścit''' in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers).<ref name=fx1_ve1_1023> iii. 41, 1.</ref><br><br>(''b'') [[जयन्त|Jayanta]] [[वारक्य|Vārakya]] (‘descendant of Varaka’) appears in the same [[वंश|Vaṃśa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1023/> as a pupil of '''[[कुबेर वारक्य|Kubera Vārakya]].''' His grandtather is also mentioned there as a pupil of '''[[कंस|Kaṃsa]] [[वारक्य|Vārakya]].'''<br><br>(''c'') A [[जयन्त|Jayanta]] [[वारक्य|Vārakya]], pupil of '''[[सुयज्ञ शाण्डिल्य|Suyajña Śāṇḍilya]],''' perhaps identical with the preceding, is found in another [[वंश|Vaṃśa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1023> iv. 17, 1.</ref><br><br>(''d'') [[जयन्त|Jayanta]] is a name of '''Yaśasvin [[लौहित्य|Lauhitya]].'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1023> iii. 42, 1. Not only is the formation of the name a late one (''cf.'' Whitney, ''Sanskrit Grammar,'' 1209d, and Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar'' 191''a''), but the [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] in which it occurs is also a late one.</ref><br><br>See also '''Dakṣa [[जयन्त|Jayanta]]''' [[लौहित्य|Lauhitya]].

जरा-बोध
<u>'''Jarā-bodha,'''</u> a word occurring only once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1024> i. 27, 10.</ref> is of doubtful meaning. It is held by Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_1024> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 103.</ref> to be the name of  a seer. Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_1024> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], x. 8.</ref> regards it as a mere adjective meaning ‘attending to the invocation,’ which is perhaps the most probable interpretation. Oldenburg,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1024> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 23. He compares the ''ṛṣī [[बोध|bodha]]-pratibodhau'' of Av. v. 30, 10.</ref> however, thinks that the word is a proper name, the literal sense being ‘alert in old age.’

जरायु
<u>'''Jarāyu'''</u> is found once in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1025> i. 27, 1.</ref> in the sense of a ‘serpent's skin.’ Usually<ref name=fx2_ve1_1025> Rv. v. 78, 8;<br> Av. i. 11, 4;<br> vi. 49, 1;<br> ix. 4, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 6, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 8;<br> xix. 76;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 1, 11, etc;<br> Chāndogya Upanisad, iii. 10. 2, etc.</ref> it denotes the outer covering (chorion) of the embryo, as opposed to the ''ulva,'' the inner covering (amnion).<br><br>Living things are occasionally classified according to their mode of origin. In the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1025> vi. 3, 1.</ref> they are divided into ''(a) āṇḍa-ja,'' ‘egg-born’; ''(b) [[जीव-ज|jīva-ja]],'' ‘born alive,’ or born from the womb; ''(c) udbhij-ja,'' ‘propagated by sprouts.’ In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx4_ve1_1025> ii. 6.</ref> the division is fourfold: ''(a) āṇḍa-ja; (b) [[जारु|jāru]]-ja,'' that is, ''[[जरायु|jarāyu]]-ja'' (found in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1025> i. 12, 1.</ref> and needlessly read here by Bo7htlingk);<ref name=fx6_ve1_1025> See ''[[जारु|jāru]]'' in Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 430, 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Deussen, ''Philosophy of the Upanishads,'' 196, 292;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 235.</ref> ''(c) udbhij-ja;'' and ''(d) svcda-ja,'' ‘sweat-born,’ explained as ‘insects.’

जरितृ
<u>'''1. Jaritṛ'''</u> is the regular term in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1026> i. 2, 2;<br> 165, 14;<br> ii. 33, 11;<br> iii. 60, 7, etc.</ref> and occasionally later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1026> Av. v. 11, 8;<br> xx. 135, 1, etc.</ref> for a singer of hymns of praise or worshipper.

जरितृ
<u>'''2. Jaritṛ.'''</u> According to Sieg,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1027> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 44 ''et seq.''</ref> mention is made in one hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1027> x. 142.</ref> of [[जरितृ|Jaritṛ]], one of the Śārṅgas. That hymn he seeks to bring into connexion with the epic<ref name=fx3_ve1_1027> Mahābhārata, i. 222, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> tradition  of the [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] Mandapāla, who wedded Jaritā, a female [[शार्ङ्ग|Śārṅga]] bird--apparently a hen sparrow (''caṭakā'')--and had four sons. These being abandoned by him and exposed to the danger of being consumed by a forest fire, prayed to Agni with the hymn Rigveda x. 142. This interpretation is very doubtful, though Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx4_ve1_1027> On Rv. x. 142, 7. 8.</ref> appears to have adopted it.

जरूथ
<u>'''Jarūtha,'''</u> mentioned in three passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1028> vii. 1, 7;<br> 9, 6;<br> x. 80. 3.</ref> appears to denote a '''demon''' defeated by Agni.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1028> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 17.</ref> Ludwig, however, followed by Griffith,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1028> ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 11, n.</ref> sees in him a foe slain in a battle in which '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]],''' the traditional author of the seventh Maṇḍala of the Rigveda, was [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], or domestic priest.

जर्तिल
<u>'''Jartila,'''</u> ‘wild sesamum,’ is mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (v. 4, 3, 2) as an unsuitable sacrificial offering. In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ix. 1, 1, 3) sesamum seeds are regarded as combining the qualities of cultivation (viz., edibility) with those of wild growth (because they are produced on unploughed land).<br>==Foot Notes==

जर्वर
<u>'''Jarvara'''</u> was Gṛhapati or ‘householder’ at the snake festival described in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1030> xxv. 15, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 35.</ref>

जल जातूकर्ण्य
<u>'''Jala Jātūkarṇya'''</u> (‘descendant of Jātūkarṇa’), is mentioned in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xvi. 29, 6) as having obtained the position of [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], or domestic priest, of the three peoples or kings of '''[[काशि|Kāśi]], [[विदेह|Videha]],''' and '''[[कोसल|Kosala]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

जलाष-भेषज
<u>'''Jalāṣa-bheṣaja,'''</u> ‘whose remedy is Jalāṣa,’ is an epithet of Rudra in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1032> i. 43, 4;<br> viii. 29, 5.</ref> and the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1032> ii. 27, 6. It also occurs in the Nīlarudra [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (a very late work), 3, and ''jalāṣa'' as an adjective is found in Rv. ii. 33, 7;<br> viii. 33, 6.</ref> The word  '''[[जालाष|Jālāṣa]]''' occurs in a hymn of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1032> vi. 57.</ref> where it denotes a remedy, perhaps, for a tumour or boil.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1032> Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 11, 321 ''et seq.;<br>'' ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 489.</ref> The commentator on this passage and the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_1032> xxxi. 11.</ref> regard [[जालाष|Jālāṣa]] as meaning ‘urine,’ which seems a probable interpretation.<ref name=fx6_ve1_1032> Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 12, 425 ''et seq.''</ref> But Geldner<ref name=fx7_ve1_1032> ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 139, n. 2.</ref> thinks that rain-water, conceived as urine, is meant; and the Naighaṇṭuka<ref name=fx8_ve1_1032> i. 12.<br><br>''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 323, 324;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 76, 77;<br> Hopkins, ''Proceedings of the American Oriental Society,'' 1894, cl.</ref> identifies ''jalāṣa'' and ''udaka'' ‘water.’

जष
<u>'''Jaṣa'''</u> is the name of some aquatic animal or fish in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1033> xi. 2, 25. There are various readings: ''[[झष|jhaṣa]], jakha, jagha.''</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1033> v. 5, 13, 1.</ref> The commentary on the latter text explains it by ''[[मकर|makara]],'' probably meaning ‘dolphin.’ The word also occurs in the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_1033> ii. 2, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 96;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 624</ref><br><br>''Cf.'' '''[[झष|Jhaṣa]].'''

जहका
<u>'''Jahakā,'''</u> the ‘polecat,’ is mentioned as a victim at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or horse sacrifice, in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1034> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 18, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 17;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 36. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 86.</ref> Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx2_ve1_1034> On [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> thinks it means a jackal living in holes (''vila-vāsī kroṣṭā'').

जह्नु
<u>'''Jahnu'''</u> occurs only in the plural in the legend of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]],''' who is said to have obtained, as [[देवरात|Devarāta]], both the lordship of the Jahnus and the divine lore of the Gāthins.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1035> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 18 (''Jahnūnām cādhipatye daive vede ca Gāthinām'');<br> Asvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 14;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 27 (p. 195, 1. 21, ed. Hillebrandt, where the reading is different and the sense altered: ''Jahnūnāṃ cādhitasthire daive vede ca Gāthinaḥ.'' The two ''ca'''s cannot be justified, and the text must be incorrect).</ref> A '''[[जाह्नव|Jāhnava]],''' or descendant of [[जह्नु|Jahnu]], was, according to the Pañcaviṃśa  [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_1035> xxi. 12. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 54, who correctly explains the passage which Sāyaṇa misunderstands.</ref> '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]],''' who is said, by means of a certain ''catū-rātra'' or ‘four-night’ ritual, to have secured the kingdom for the Jahnus in their conflict with the '''Vṛcīvants.''' He is here described as a king. Again, in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_1035> vii. 17, 6, 7.</ref> [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] is addressed as a ''[[राज-पुत्र|rāja-putra]],'' ‘prince,’ and ''Bharatarṣabha,'' ‘bull of the Bharatas.’ It is therefore clear that the Brāhmaṇas, though not the Saṃhitās, saw in him at once a priest and a prince by origin, though there is no trace whatever of their seeing in him a prince who won Brahmanhood as in the version of the later texts.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1035> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1, 337 ''et seq.''</ref><br><br>A Jahnāvī is mentioned twice in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1035> i. 116, 19;<br> iii. 58, 6. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 153.</ref> being either the wife of [[जह्नु|Jahnu]], or, as Sāyaṇa thinks, the race of [[जह्नु|Jahnu]]. The family must clearly once have been a great one, later merged in the Bharatas.

जात शाकायन्य
<u>'''Jāta Śākāyanya'''</u> (‘descendant of Śāka’) is mentioned as a ritual authority and contemporary of '''[[शङ्ख|Śaṅkha]]''' in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā (xxii. 7).<br>==Foot Notes==

जात-रूप
<u>'''Jāta-rūpa,'''</u> ‘possessing native beauty,’ is the name of ‘gold’ in the later Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve1_1037> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 13 (''[[जातरूप|jātarūpa]]-maya,'' ‘composed of gold’);<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 25;<br> Naighaṇṭuka, i. 2.</ref> and the Sūtras.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1037> ''[[रजत|Rajata]]-jātarūpe,'' ‘silver and gold,’ Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 6, 24. ''Cf.'' viii. 1, 3;<br> [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 16;<br> xiii. 3, etc.;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 19, 9.</ref>

जाति
<u>'''Jāti,'''</u> which in the Pāli<ref name=fx1_ve1_1038> Fick, ''Die sociale Gliederung,'' 22, n. 4.</ref> texts is the word denoting ‘caste,’ does not occur at all in the early Vedic literature; when it is found, as in the Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_1038> xv. 4, 14. So ''jātīya,'' xx. 2, 11, etc.</ref> it has only the sense of ‘family’ (for which ''cf.'' '''Kula, [[गोत्र|Gotra]],''' and '''[[विश्|Viś]]'''). For the influence of the family system on the growth of caste, see '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]].''' To assume that it was the basis of caste, as does  Senart,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1038> ''Les Castes dans l'Inde'' (1896).</ref> is difficult in face of the late appearance of words for family and of stress on family.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1038> Fick, ''op. cit.,'' 3;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 51, 267 ''et seq.''</ref>

जातू-कर्ण्य
<u>'''Jātū-karṇya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Jātūkarṇa,'''’ is the patronymic of several persons.<br><br>(''a'') A pupil of '''[[आसुरायण|Āsurāyaṇa]]''' and '''[[यास्क|Yāska]]''' bears this name in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] in the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1039> ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3.</ref> In the Mādhyaṃdina<ref name=fx2_ve1_1039> ii. 5, 21;<br> iv. 5, 27.</ref> he is a pupil of '''[[भारद्वाज|Bhāradvāja]].'''<br><br>(''b'') A [[कात्यायनी-पुत्र|Kātyāyanī-putra]], ‘son of [[कात्यायनी|Kātyāyanī]],’ bears this name in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1039> viii. 10.</ref><br><br>(''c'') A [[जातूकर्ण्य|Jātūkarṇya]] is mentioned in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_1039> xxvi. 5 (Jātukarṇya in Lindner's index, 159, is a misprint).</ref> as a contemporary of '''[[अलीकयु वाचस्पत्य|Alīkayu Vācaspatya]]''' and other sages.<br><br>(''d'') [[जातूकर्ण्य|Jātūkarṇya]] is in the Sūtras<ref name=fx5_ve1_1039> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 3, 3;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 2, 17;<br> iii. 16, 14;<br> 20, 19;<br> xvi. 29, 6 ('''Jala''');<br> Kātyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 1, 27;<br> xx. 3, 17;<br> xxv. 7, 34, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 138140.</ref> frequently a patronymic of teachers whose identity cannot be determined. The same person or different persons may here be meant.

जातू-ष्ठिर
<u>'''Jātū-ṣṭhira'''</u> occurs in one verse of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1040> ii. 13, 11.</ref> where Sāyaṇa and Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_1040> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 152.</ref> interpret the word as a proper name. Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_1040> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' (with a wrong reference, ii. 23, 11).</ref> renders it as an adjective meaning ‘naturally powerful.’<ref name=fx4_ve1_1040> ''Urkräftig.'' Grassmann, ''Wo7rterbuch,'' similarly explains the word as ‘powerful by nature or birth’ (''jātū'').</ref>

जान
<u>'''Jāna,'''</u> ‘descendant of Jana,’ is the patronymic of '''Vṛśa''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1041> xiii. 3, 12.</ref> and apparently in the Śāṭyāyanaka.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1041> In Sāyaṇa on Rv. v. 5. ''Cf.'' Bṛhaddevatā, v. 14 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes;<br> Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 64 ''et seq.''</ref> 

जानक
<u>'''Jānaka,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[जनक|Janaka]],’ is the patronymic of '''Kratuvid''' in some MSS. of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1042> vii. 34.</ref> In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_1042> ii. 3, 8, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 1.</ref> the name appears instead as '''[[क्रतुजित् जानकि|Kratujit Jānaki]].''' [[जानक|Jānaka]] is also, according to some manuscripts of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_1042> vi. 3, 10 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> the patronymic of '''Āyasthūṇa,''' but is here no doubt a misreading of '''[[जानकि|Jānaki]].'''

जानकि
<u>'''Jānaki,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[जनक|Janaka]],’ is the patronymic of '''Kratujit''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1043> ii. 3, 8, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 1.</ref> of '''Kratuvid''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_1043> vii. 34.</ref> and of '''Āyasthūṇa''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_1043> vi. 3, 10 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]] = vi. 3, 18. 19, Mādhyaṃdina).</ref> where he is mentioned as a pupil of '''[[चूड भागवित्ति|Cūḍa Bhāgavitti]],''' and as teacher of '''[[सत्यकाम|Satyakāma]] [[जाबाल|Jābāla]].'''

जानं-तपि
<u>'''Jānaṃ-tapi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Janaṃtapa,’ is the patronymic of '''Atyarāti''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 23).<br>==Foot Notes==

जान-पद
<u>'''Jāna-pada.'''</u> See '''[[जनपद|Janapada]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

जान-श्रुति
<u>'''Jāna-śruti,'''</u> ‘descendant of Jānaśruta,’ is the patronymic of '''Pautrāyaṇa''' in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iv. 1, 1; 2, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

जान-श्रुतेय
<u>'''Jāna-śruteya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Jānaśruti’ or of ‘Janaśrutā.’ is the patronymic or metronymic of several persons--'''Upāvi'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_1047> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 25, 115.</ref> or '''[[औपावि|Aupāvi]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1047> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, 1, 5. 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 4, 5.</ref> '''Ulukya,'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1047> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3.</ref> '''Nagarin,'''<ref name=fx4_ve1_1047> ''Ibid.,'' iii. 40, 2.</ref> and '''[[सायक|Sāyaka]].'''<ref name=fx5_ve1_1047> ''Ibid.''</ref>

जाबाल
<u>'''Jābāla,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Jabāla,'''’ is the metronymic of '''[[महाशाल|Mahāśāla]]'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_1048> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 3, 3, 1;<br> 6, 1, 1.</ref> and '''[[सत्यकाम|Satyakāma]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1048> ''Ibid.,'' xiii. 5, 3, 1;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1, 14;<br> vi. 3, 19;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 4, 1, etc.;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 7.</ref> [[जाबाल|Jābāla]] is also mentioned as a teacher in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_1048> iii. 9, 9.</ref> which refers to the  Jābālas<ref name=fx4_ve1_1048> iii. 7, 2.</ref> as well. The [[जाबाल|Jābāla]] Gṛhapatis are spoken of in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx5_ve1_1048> xxiii. 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 395.</ref>

जाबालायन
<u>'''Jābālāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[जाबाल|Jābāla]],’ is the patronymic of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[माध्यंदिनायन|Mādhyaṃdināyana]],''' who is mentioned in the second [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iv. 6, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

जामदग्निय
<u>'''Jāmadagniya'''</u> is the patronymic of two ‘descendants of Jamadagni’ in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1050> vii. 1, 9, 1.</ref> It appears from the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1050> xxi. 10, 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 12, 251, n.;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 54.</ref> that the '''Aurvas''' are meant, and that Jamadagni's descendants were ever prosperous.

जामातृ
<u>'''Jāmātṛ'''</u> is a rare word denoting ‘son-in-law’ in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1051> viii. 2, 20. Vāyu is called the ''[[जामातृ|jāmātṛ]]'' of [[त्वष्टृ|Tvaṣṭṛ]] in viii. 26, 21. 22.<br><br>''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 517;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 78, 79.</ref> where also occurs the word '''[[विजामातृ|Vijāmātṛ]],''' denoting an ‘unsatisfactory son-in-law,’ as one who does not pay a sufficient price, or one who, having other defects, must purchase a bride. Friendly relations between son-in-law and father-in-law are referred to in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1051> x. 28, 1. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 255.</ref>

जामि
<u>'''Jāmi,'''</u> a word which appears originally to have meant ‘related in blood,’ is not rarely used as an epithet of ‘sister’ ('''[[स्वसृ|Svasṛ]]'''), and sometimes even denotes ‘sister’ itself, the emphasis being on the blood-relationship.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1052> ''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Dic indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 463, 464. As ‘relation,’ it occurs, ''e.g.,'' Rv. i. 31, 10;<br> 75, 3. 4;<br> 100, 11;<br> 124, 6, etc.;<br> as ‘sister,’ Rv. i. 65, 7;<br> x. 10, 10, etc.;<br> with ''svasā,'' i. 123, 5;<br> 185, 5;<br> iii. 1, 11;<br> ix. 65, 1;<br> 89, 4, etc.</ref> So it appears in a passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1052> i. 17, 1.</ref> where ‘brotherless sisters’  (''abhrātara iva jāmayaḥ'') are referred to. The word is similarly used in the dispute occurring in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1052> iii. 37.</ref> as to the precedence of [[राका|Rākā]], or of the wives of the gods, in a certain rite. One party is there described as holding that the sister should be preferred (''jāmyai vai pūrva-peyam'')--apparently at a ceremonial family meal--to the wife, presumably as being of one blood with the husband, while the wife is not (being ''anyodaryā,'' ‘of another womb’).<ref name=fx4_ve1_1052> Delbrück, ''loc. cit.''</ref> In the neuter<ref name=fx5_ve1_1052> Rv. iii. 54, 9;<br> x. 10, 4;<br> ''[[जामि|jāmi]]-kṛt,'' ‘making relationship,’ Av. iv. 19, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Altareya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> the word means ‘relationship,’ like ''[[जामि|jāmi]]-tva,'' which also occurs in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx6_ve1_1052> i. 105, 9;<br> 166, 13;<br> x. 55, 4;<br> 64, 13.</ref>

जामि-शंस
<u>'''Jāmi-śaṃsa,'''</u> the ‘imprecation by a sister’ or ‘relation,’ is mentioned in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1053> ii. 10, 1 (= [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 6, 3), and personified in ix. 4, 15.<br><br>''Cf. jāmyāḥ śapathaḥ,'' Av. ii. 7, 2;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 362.</ref> showing that family disputes were not rare. This is also indicated by the word '''[[भ्रातृव्य|Bhrātṛvya]],''' which, while properly meaning ‘father's brother's son,’ regularly denotes simply ‘enemy.’

जाम्बिल
<u>'''Jāmbila,'''</u> ‘hollow of the knee,’<ref name=fx1_ve1_1054> Perhaps for ''jānu-bila. Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 11, n. 4.</ref> occurs once in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_1054> iii. 15, 3.</ref> The word also occurs in the form of Jāmbīla in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve1_1054> v. 13, 1.</ref> and the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1054> xxv. 3.</ref> Mahīdhara, in his commentary on the latter text, interprets the word as ‘knee-pan,’ which he says is so named because of its resemblance to the citron, ''jāmbīra.''

जायन्ती-पुत्र
<u>'''Jāyantī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of Jāyantī,’ is mentioned in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1055> vi. 5, 2 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]] = vi. 4, 32 Mādhyaṃdina).</ref> as a pupil of '''[[माण्डूकायनीपुत्र|Māṇḍūkāyanīputra]].'''

जाया
<u>'''Jāyā'''</u> regularly denotes ‘wife,’ and, as opposed to '''[[पत्नी|Patnī]],''' wife as an object of marital affection, the source of the continuance  of the race.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1056> Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 411, 412. ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 105, 2;<br> 124, 7;<br> iii. 53, 4;<br> iv. 3, 2;<br> 18, 3;<br> ix. 82, 4;<br> x. 10, 7;<br> 17, 1;<br> 71, 4, etc.;<br> Av. iii. 30, 2;<br> vi. 60, 1, etc.</ref> So it is used of the wife of the gambler, and of the wife of the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] in the Rigveda;<ref name=fx2_ve1_1056> x. 34, 2. 3. 13, and x. 109.</ref> it is also frequently combined with '''Pati,''' ‘husband,’<ref name=fx3_ve1_1056> Rv. iv. 3, 2;<br> x. 149, 4.</ref> both there and in the later literature.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1056> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 23, 1. ''Cf.'' vii. 13, 10;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 6, 7, 9. ''Cf.'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 6, 12.</ref> [[पत्नी|Patnī]], on the other hand, is used to denote the wife as partner in the sacrifice;<ref name=fx5_ve1_1056> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 9, 2, 14.</ref> when no share in it is assigned to her, she is called [[जाया|Jāyā]].<ref name=fx6_ve1_1056> i. 1, 4, 13.</ref> The distinction is, of course, merely relative; hence one text<ref name=fx7_ve1_1056> ''Ibid.,'' i. 1, 4, 16.</ref> calls Manu's wife [[जाया|Jāyā]], another<ref name=fx8_ve1_1056> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 8, 1.</ref> [[पत्नी|Patnī]]. Later on [[जाया|Jāyā]] is superseded by [[दार|Dāra]].

जायान्य
<u>'''Jāyānya,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_1057> Av. vii. 76, 3-5;<br> xix. 44, 2.</ref> '''Jāyenya,'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1057> ii. 3, 5, 2;<br> 5, 6, 5.</ref> are variant forms of the name of a disease mentioned in the Atharvaveda and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā. In one passage of the former text<ref name=fx3_ve1_1057> xix. 44, 2.</ref> it is mentioned with jaundice (''harimā'') and pains in the limbs (''[[अङ्ग|aṅga]]-bhedo visalpakaḥ''). Zimmer<ref name=fx4_ve1_1057> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 377, following Wise, ''Hindu System of Medicint,'' 321, describing [[अक्षत|Akṣata]].</ref> thinks these are its symptoms, and identifies it with a kind of [[यक्ष्म|Yakṣma]], or disease of the lungs. Bloomfield<ref name=fx5_ve1_1057> ''American Journal of Philology,'' 11, 320 ''et seq.;<br> Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 559-561.</ref> prefers to identify it with syphilis, in accordance with certain indications in the ritual of the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx6_ve1_1057> xxxii. 11. ''Cf.'' also the commentary on Av. vii. 76, and [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> Roth conjectures ‘gout,’ but Whitney<ref name=fx7_ve1_1057> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 442.<br><br>''Cf.'' Henry, ''Lelivre vii de l' Atharvavéda,'' 98.</ref> leaves the nature of the disease doubtful.

जार
<u>'''Jāra,'''</u> ‘lover,’ has no sinister sense in the early texts<ref name=fx1_ve1_1058> Rv. i. 66, 8;<br> 117, 18;<br> 134, 3;<br> 152, 4;<br> ix. 32, 5, etc. The word is often used mythologically, as, ''e.g., [[जार|jāra]] uṣasām,'' ‘lover of the dawns,’ vii. 9, 1. ''Cf'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 308.</ref> generally, where the word applies to any lover. But it seems probable that the [[जार|Jāra]] at the Puruṣamedha, or human sacrifice,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1058> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 4. 1.</ref>  must be regarded as an illegitimate lover; this sense also appears in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_1058> vi. 4, 11.</ref> and Indra is styled the lover of '''Ahalyā,''' wife of '''[[गौतम|Gautama]]'''<ref name=fx4_ve1_1058> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 65.</ref>

जारत्-कारव
<u>'''Jārat-kārava'''</u> (‘descendant of Jaratkāru’) '''Ārtabhāga''' (‘descendant of Ṛtabhāga’) is the name of a teacher mentioned in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka (vii. 20) and the Bṛhadāranyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iii. 2, 1, in both recensions).<br>==Foot Notes==

जारु
<u>'''Jāru.'''</u> See '''[[जरायु|Jarāyu]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

जाल
<u>'''Jāla'''</u> occurs in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1061> viii. 8. 5. 3 (as used against foes);<br> x. 1, 30.</ref> and the Sūtras<ref name=fx2_ve1_1061> Kātyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vii. 4, 7. etc.</ref> in the sense of ‘net.’ Jālaka is used in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1061> iv. 2, 3.</ref> of a reticulated membrane resembling a woven covering.

जालाष
<u>'''Jālāṣa.'''</u> See '''Jalāṣa,''' which is read by Sāyaṇa in the Atharvaveda (vi. 57, 2) for [[जालाष|Jālāṣa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1062> ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 11, 320.</ref>

जाष्कमद
<u>'''Jāṣkamada'''</u> is the name of an unknown animal in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1063> xi. 9, 9. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 88.</ref>

जास्-पति
<u>'''Jās-pati'''</u> occurs once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1064> i. 135. 8.</ref> in the sense of the ‘head of the family.’ The abstract formed from this word, Jās-patya, apparently denoting ‘lordship of children,’ is also found there.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1064> Rv. v. 28, 3;<br> x. 85, 23.</ref>

जाहुष
<u>'''Jāhuṣa'''</u> is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1065> i. 116, 10;<br> vii. 71, 5 ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 159.</ref> of a protégé of the Aśvins. 

जाह्नव
<u>'''Jāhnava,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[जह्नु|Jahnu]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1066> xxi. 12. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 32;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 54.</ref> This fact is of some importance as disproving Aufrecht's theory<ref name=fx2_ve1_1066> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], 424.</ref> that the Jahnus were the clan of '''Ajīgarta''' the father of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]].'''

जित्वन् शैलिनि
<u>'''Jitvan Śailini'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1067> iv. 1, 2 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]] = iv. 1, 5 Mādhyaṃdina, which has [[शैलिन|Śailina]] as the patronymic).</ref> a contemporary of '''[[जनक|Janaka]]''' and '''[[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]].''' He held that speech (''[[वाच्|vāc]]'') was [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]].

जिह्वावन्त् बाध्योग
<u>'''Jihvāvant Bādhyoga'''</u> is the name, in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1068> vi. 5, 3 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]] = vi. 4, 33 Mādhyaṃdina).</ref> of a teacher, pupil of '''[[असित|Asita]] Vārṣāgaṇa.'''

जीव-गृभ्
<u>'''Jīva-gṛbh,'''</u> ‘seizing alive,’ is, according to Roth,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1069> St Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br> Siebenzig Lieder,'' 174.</ref> the term for a police official in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1069> x. 97, 11.</ref> But although this sense is rendered possible by the mention of '''[[मध्यमशी|Madhyamaśī]],''' perhaps ‘arbitrator,’ in the same passage,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1069> Rv. x. 97, 12.</ref> it is neither necessary nor probable.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1069> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 180.</ref>

जीव-ज
<u>'''Jīva-ja.'''</u> See '''[[जरायु|Jarāyu]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

जीवन्त्
<u>'''Jīvant'''</u> appears to denote a certain plant in one passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1071> xix. 39, 3. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 960.</ref> where the edition of Roth and Whitney has the unjustified emendation '''Jīvala.'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1071> With this conjectural form, ''cf.'' Jīvalā, an epithet of a plant in Av. vi. 59, 3;<br> viii. 2, 6;<br> 7, 6;<br> xix. 39. 3.</ref> 

जीवल चल्लकि
<u>'''Jīvala Callaki,'''</u> ‘descendant of Celaka,’ is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1072> ii. 3, 1, 31-35. ''Cf.'' Lévi, ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 140.</ref> as reproving '''[[तक्षन्|Takṣan]].'''

जुहू
<u>'''Juhū'''</u> is the regular name in the Rigveda and later for the tongue-shaped ladle in which butter was offered to the gods.(**  1) Rv. viii. 44, 5; x. 21, 3; Av. xviii. 4, 5. 6, etc.<br>==Foot Notes==

जूर्णि
<u>'''Jūrṇi,'''</u> ‘firebrand,’ is regarded by Zimmer<ref name=fx1_ve1_1074> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 301.</ref> as one of the weapons of the Vedic Indians. But since it is only mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1074> i. 129, 8. ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 4.</ref> as a weapon used by demons, its employment in normal war cannot be safely assumed.

जूर्णी
<u>'''Jūrṇī'''</u> is one of the names given to serpents in a hymn of the Atharvaveda (ii. 24, 5), perhaps from their habit of casting their slough. See '''Ahi.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

जेतृ
<u>'''Jetṛ.'''</u> See '''Sṛṇi.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

जैत्रायण सहो-जित्
<u>'''Jaitrāyaṇa Saho-jit'''</u> is apparently in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1077> xviii. 5.</ref> the name of a prince who celebrated the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]], or ‘royal consecration.’ Von Schroeder<ref name=fx2_ve1_1077> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gesellschaft,'' 49, 168.</ref> quotes in support of Jaitrāyaṇa as a proper name the derivative Jaitrāyaṇi, ‘descendant of Jaitra,’ formed according to the Gaṇa ''karṇādi,'' which is referred to by Pāṇini;<ref name=fx3_ve1_1077> iv. 2, 80.</ref> but it should be noted that in the parallel passage of the Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitā<ref name=fx4_ve1_1077> xxviii. 5, cited by von Schroeder ''[[काठक|Kāṭhaka]],'' 1, p. 269.</ref> the reading is different, and no proper personal name appears, the subject being Indra, the god. This reading seems much more probable, for the verse should be general, and suit every king performing the rite. 

जैमिनि
<u>'''Jaimini'''</u> does not appear till the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] period.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1078> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 10;<br> vi. 6, etc. He appears also as a pupil of Vyāsa, Sāmavidhāna [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''ad fin.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 377. ''Cf.'' his ''Indian Literature,'' 56.</ref> But a Jaiminīya Saṃhitā of the [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]] is extant, and has been edited and discussed by Caland;<ref name=fx2_ve1_1078> As part ii. of Hillebrandt's ''Indische Forschungen, Breslau,'' 1907. See Oldenberg, ''Go7ttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen,'' 1908, 712 ''et seq.''</ref> and a Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], of which a special section is the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_1078> Edited by Oertel, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 79-260.</ref> is known and has formed the subject of several articles by Oertel.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1078>''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 15 ''et seq.;<br>'' 19, 97;<br> 23, 325, 26, 176, 306;<br> 28, 81;<br> ''Actes du onzieme Congres International des Orientalistes,'' 1, 225;<br> ''Transactions of the Connectieut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 155 ''et seq.''</ref>

जैवन्तायन
<u>'''Jaivantāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Jīvanta,’ is mentioned in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1079> iv. 5, 26 (Mādhyaṃdina). The name is recognised by Pāṇini, iv. 1, 103.</ref> as a teacher, with '''[[शौनक|Śaunaka]]''' and '''[[रैभ्य|Raibhya]],''' of '''[[रौहिणायन|Rauhiṇāyana]].'''

जैवल
<u>'''Jaivala'''</u> or '''Jaivali,''' ‘descendant of Jīvala,’ is the patronymic of '''Pravāhaṇa''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka<ref name=fx1_ve1_1080> vi. 2, 1 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]] = vi. 1, 1 Mādhyaṃdina), where the form is [[जैवल|Jaivala]].</ref> and Chāndogya Upaniṣads.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1080> i. 8, 1. 2. 8;<br> v. 3, 1.</ref> Jaivali, the king, in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1080> i. 38, 4.</ref> is the same person.

ज्ञातृ
<u>'''Jñātṛ'''</u> occurs in two passages of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1081> vi. 32, 3;<br> viii. 8, 21.</ref> and one of the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx2_ve1_1081> xii. 14. ''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 66, n. 4.</ref> with a somewhat obscure sense. Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve1_1081> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 181.</ref> conjectures not unnaturally that the word is a technical term taken from law, meaning ‘witness.’ The reference is, perhaps, to a custom of carrying on transactions of business before witnesses as practised in other primitive societies.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1081> In Manu, viii. 57, the word is a various reading for ''sākṣin,'' ‘witness.’<br><br>''Cf.'' Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 140.</ref> Roth<ref name=fx5_ve1_1081> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> suggests that the word has the sense of  ‘surety.’ But Bloomfield<ref name=fx6_ve1_1081> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 475.</ref> and Whitney<ref name=fx7_ve1_1081> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 306.</ref> ignore these interpretations.

ज्ञाति
<u>'''Jñāti'''</u> (masc.), a word which originally seems to have meant ‘acquaintance,’<ref name=fx1_ve1_1082> Being in all probability derived from ''jñā,'' ‘know,’ not from ''jan,'' ‘beget,’ as would at first sight seem more likely on account of the sense. ''Cf.'' the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1082> vii. 55, 5, seems to refer to the members of the joint family sleeping in the paternal house;<br> x. 66, 14;<br> 85, 28 (the kinsmen of the bride are meant);<br> 117, 9 (perhaps ‘brother and sister’ are meant by ''jñātī'' here, but ‘kinsfolk’ will do;<br> ''of.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 432).</ref> and later<ref name=fx3_ve1_1082> Av. xii. 5, 44 (where Whitney in his Translation renders the word by ‘acquaintances,’ which seems too vague and feeble);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 5, 2;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 4, 3 (''jñātibhyāṃ vā sakhibhyāṃ, vā,'' ‘where ‘relations’ are contrasted with ‘friends’ or ‘companions’);<br> ii. 2, 2, 20;<br> 5, 2, 20;<br> xi. 3, 3, 7, etc.</ref> a ‘relation,’ apparently one who was connected by blood on the father's side, though the passages do not necessarily require the limitation. But this sense follows naturally enough from the patriarchal basis of Vedic society.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1082> For the transition from the etymological meaning, ''cf.'' , which in Homer designate ‘brother’ and ‘sister’;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref>

ज्या
<u>'''Jyā'''</u> is the regular word for ‘bowstring’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1083> iv. 27, 3;<br> vi. 75, 3;<br> x. 51, 6, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1083> Av. i. 1, 3;<br> v. 13, 6;<br> vi. 42, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 9;<br> xxix. 51, etc.</ref> The making of bowstrings was a special craft, as is shown by the occurrence of the [[ज्या|Jyā]]-kāra, or ‘maker of bowstrings,’ among the victims at the Puruṣamedha, or human sacrifice, in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_1083> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 3, 1.</ref> The bowstring consisted of a thong of ox-hide.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1083> Rv. vi. 75, 3;<br> Av. i. 1, 3. In the Epic the bowstring is made of hemp (''maurvī'');<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 271.</ref> It was not usually kept taut,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1083> Av. vi. 42, 1.</ref> but was specially tightened when the bow was to be used.<ref name=fx6_ve1_1083> Rv. x. 166, 3.</ref> The sound of the bowstring (''[[ज्या|jyā]]-[[घोष|ghoṣa]]'') is referred to in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx7_ve1_1083> v. 21, 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 298 299.</ref><br><br>''Cf.'' '''[[आर्त्नी|Ārtnī]].''' 

ज्याका
<u>'''Jyākā'''</u> means ‘bowstring,’ with a contemptuous sense, in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1084> x. 133, 1, where ''anyakeṣāṃ jyākāḥ'' is unmistakably contemptuous. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 137.</ref> and in the simple sense in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1084> i. 2, 2.</ref>

ज्या-पाश
<u>'''Jyā-pāśa'''</u> means ‘bowstring’ in the Atharvaveda (xi. 10, 22).<br>==Foot Notes==

ज्या-ह्रोड
<u>'''Jyā-hroḍa'''</u> occurs in the description of the arms of the '''[[व्रात्य|Vrātya]]''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1086> xvii. 1, 14 (spelt ''-hṇoḍa'' in text, ''-hnoḍa'' in comm.).</ref> and is also mentioned in the Sūtras.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1086> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxii. 4, 11 (spelt ''-hroḍa'');<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 6, 8 (spelt ''-hnoḍa:'' the editor notes that the Drāhyāyaṇa [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] has the same reading).</ref> The sense is somewhat obscure, for one [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] describes it as a ‘bow not meant for use’ (''ayogyaṃ [[धनुस्|dhanus]]''),<ref name=fx3_ve1_1086> Kātyāyana, ''loc. cit.''</ref> while the other speaks of it as a ‘bow without an arrow’ (''dhanuṣka aniṣu'').<ref name=fx4_ve1_1086> Lāṭyāyana, ''loc. cit.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 38;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Acad my of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 32;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 33, 52.</ref> Some sort of a bow, therefore, seems to be meant.

ज्येष्ठ
<u>'''Jyeṣṭha,'''</u> ordinarily meaning ‘greatest,’ has further the specific sense of ‘eldest’<ref name=fx1_ve1_1087> With changed accent, ''jyeṣṭhá. Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 83, 14.</ref> brother in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1087> iv. 33, 5;<br> x. 11, 2.</ref> It also means the eldest among sons, which is another side of the same sense.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1087> Av. xii. 2, 35;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 17;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 3, 8, ''and cf.'' Jyaiṣthineya.</ref>

ज्येष्ठ-घ्नी
<u>'''Jyeṣṭha-ghnī,'''</u> ‘slaying the eldest,’ is the name of a '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]],''' or lunar mansion, usually called '''[[ज्येष्ठा|Jyeṣṭhā]],''' in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1088> vi. 110, 2. ''Cf.'' vi. 112, 1.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1088> i. 5, 2, 8. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 361.</ref> It is Antares or ''Cor Scipionis.''

ज्येष्ठा
<u>'''Jyeṣṭhā.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].''' <br>==Foot Notes==

ज्यैष्ठिनेय
<u>'''Jyaiṣṭhineya'''</u> denotes, in combination with '''[[ज्येष्ठ|Jyeṣṭha]],''' the eldest,’ a ‘son of the father's first wife’ (''[[ज्येष्ठा|jyeṣṭhā]]''), in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1090> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 8, 1 (opposed to ''haniṣṭha'' and ''hāniṣṭhineya'');<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 2;<br> xx. 5, 2.</ref>

ज्योतिष
<u>'''Jyotiṣa,'''</u> ‘astronomy.’ It is important to note that no reference to any work on astronomy occurs in the Saṃhitās or Brāhmaṇas. The text which claims to represent the astronomical science of the Veda has been edited by Weber,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1091> ''Ueber den Vedakalender namens Jyotiṣam'' (1862).</ref> and has frequently been discussed since.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1091> See references in Thibaut, ''Astrenomie, Astrologie und Mathematik,'' 20, 29.</ref> Its date is unknown, but is undoubtedly late, as is shown alike by the contents and form of the work.

ज्वालायन
<u>'''Jvālāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Jvāla,’ is the name of a man, a pupil of '''[[गौषूक्ति|Gauṣūkti]],''' mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iv. 16, 1), in a list of teachers.<br>==Foot Notes==

झष
<u>'''Jhaṣa'''</u> is mentioned in the story of Manu told in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1093> i. 8, 1, 4.</ref> where it means a ‘great fish’ (''[[महा-मत्स्य|mahā-matsya]]'') according to the commentator. Eggeling<ref name=fx2_ve1_1093> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 217, n. 3;<br> 26, xxxi.</ref> suggests that a horned fish is meant, because in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve1_1093> i. 7, 1;<br> ii. 6, 7.</ref> the Iḍā, or personified libation, is represented as a cow, and this may have brought in the idea of a horned fish in the later form of an old legend. But ''cf.'' '''[[जष|Jaṣa]].''' 

तकवान
<u>'''Takavāna'''</u> appears to be a patronymic from Taku,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1094> ''Cf.'' [[भृगवाण|Bhṛgavāṇa]], from [[भृगु|Bhṛgu]];<br> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Taku,'' as an adjective(?), occurs in Rigveda, ix. 97, 52.</ref> and to be the name of a seer in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1094> i. 120, 6.</ref> presumably a descendant of Taku [[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]], for his name occurs in a group of hymns composed by the Kākṣīvatas.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1094> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 221.<br><br>''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 92;<br> Ludwig, ''Über Methode bei Interpretation des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 47.</ref>

तक्मन्
<u>'''Takman'''</u> is a disease repeatedly mentioned in the Atharvaveda, but later not known under this name. It is the subject of five hymns<ref name=fx1_ve1_1095> i. 25;<br> v. 22;<br> vi. 20;<br> vii. 116;<br> xix. 39 (''cf.'' v. 4).</ref> of the Atharvaveda, and is often mentioned elsewhere.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1095> Av. iv. 9, 8;<br> v. 4. 1. 9;<br> 30, 16;<br> ix. 8, 6;<br> xi. 2, 22. 26, etc.</ref> Weber<ref name=fx3_ve1_1095> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 119;<br> Roth, ''Zur Litteratur und Geschishte des Weda,'' 39, had, from the use of [[कुष्ठ|Kuṣṭha]] as a remedy, regarded it as denoting ‘leprosy,’ and was followed by Pictet, Kuhn's ''Zeitschrift'' 5, 337. Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 4, 280, thought ‘consumption’ was meant.</ref> first identified it with ‘fever,’ and Grohmann<ref name=fx4_ve1_1095> ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 381 ''et seq.''</ref> showed that all the symptoms pointed to that ailment.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1095> See also Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 451 ''et seq.;<br>'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 379-385, and compare the ''jvara'' (a non-Vedic word) of the classical medicine, Wise, ''Hindu System of Medicine,'' 219 ''et seq.;<br>'' Jolly, ''Medicin,'' 70-72. Dārila and Keśava, the commentators on the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], everywhere equate ''[[तक्मन्|takman]]'' and ''jvara.''</ref> Reference is made to the alternate hot and shivering fits of the patient,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1095> Av. i. 25, 2-4;<br> v. 22, 2. 7. 10;<br> vi. 20, 3;<br> vii. 116, 1.</ref> to the yellow colour of the jaundice which accompanies the fever,<ref name=fx7_ve1_1095> Av. i. 25, 2;<br> v. 22, 2;<br> vi. 20, 3.</ref> and to its peculiar periodicity. The words used to describe its varieties are ''anye-dyuḥ,''<ref name=fx8_ve1_1095> Av. i. 25, 4;<br> vii. 116, 2.</ref> ''ubhaya-dyuḥ,''<ref name=fx9_ve1_1095> ''Ibid.''</ref> ''[[तृतीयक|tṛtīyaka]],''<ref name=fx10_ve1_1095> Av. i. 25, 4;<br> v. 22, 13;<br> xix. 39, 10.</ref> ''vi-tṛtīya,''<ref name=fx11_ve1_1095> Av. v. 22, 13.</ref> and ''sadaṃ-di,''<ref name=fx12_ve1_1095> Av. v. 22, 13;<br> xix. 39, 10.</ref> the exact sense of most of which terms is somewhat uncertain. It is agreed<ref name=fx13_ve1_1095> Grohmann, ''op. cit.,'' 387;<br> Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 382;<br> Bloomfield, ''op. cit.,'' 274.</ref> that the first epithet designates the fever known as ''quotidianus,'' which recurs each day at the same hour, though the word is curious (lit.  ‘on the other--''i.e.,'' next, day’). The ''ubhaya-dyuḥ'' (‘on both days’) variety appears to mean a disease recurring for two successive days, the third being free; this corresponds to the ''rhythmus quartanus complicatus.''<ref name=fx14_ve1_1095> Grohmann, 388;<br> Zimmer, 382;<br> Bloomfield, 274. It may conceivably be the form styled Cāturthaka Viparyaya (Wise, ''op. cit.,'' 232), in which the paroxysm occurs every fourth day, and lasts for two days.</ref> But Sāyaṇa considers that it means a fever recurring on the third day, the ‘tertian.’ The ''[[तृतीयक|tṛtīyaka]],'' however, must be the ‘tertian’ fever,<ref name=fx15_ve1_1095> Sāyaṇa on Av. i. 25, 4;<br> Bloomfield, 451. It is the ''jvara [[तृतीयक|tṛtīyaka]]'' of Suśruta (2, 404, 7).</ref> though Zimmer<ref name=fx16_ve1_1095> ''Op. cit.,'' 383, quoting Hügel, Kashmir, 1, 133.</ref> suggests that it may mean a fever which is fatal at the third paroxysm. Grohmann<ref name=fx17_ve1_1095> ''Op. cit.,'' 388.</ref> regards the ''vi-[[तृतीयक|tṛtīyaka]]'' as equivalent to the ''tertiana duplicata,'' a common form in southern countries, in which the fever occurs daily, but with a correspondence in point of time or severity of attack on alternate days. Bloomfield<ref name=fx18_ve1_1095> ''Op. cit.,'' 451.</ref> suggests that it is identical with the ''ubhaya-dyuḥ'' variety. The ''sadaṃ-di''<ref name=fx19_ve1_1095> Of doubtful derivation: either ‘always cutting’ (''of'' Sāyaṇa on Av. xix. 39, 10), or ‘always fastening upon’ (Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''), or ‘belonging to every day’ = ''sadaṃdina'' (Zimmer, 383, n.;<br> Bloomfield, 452).</ref> type appears to be the kind later known as ''saṃtata-jvara'' (‘continuous fever’), in which there are attacks of several days’ duration, with an interval followed by a fresh period of attack. Fever occurred at different seasons, in the autumn (''[[शारद|śārada]]''), in the hot weather (''graiṣma''), in the rains (''vārṣika''),<ref name=fx20_ve1_1095> Av. v. 22, 13.</ref> but was especially prevalent in the first, as is indicated by the epithet ''viśva-[[शारद|śārada]],'' ‘occurring every autumn.’<ref name=fx21_ve1_1095> Av. ix. 8, 6;<br> xix. 34, 10.</ref><br><br>The disease is said to arise when Agni enters the waters.<ref name=fx22_ve1_1095> Av. 1, 25. 1.</ref> From this Weber<ref name=fx23_ve1_1095> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 119.</ref> deduced that it was considered to be the result of a chill supervening on heat, or the influence of heat on marshy land. Grohmann<ref name=fx24_ve1_1095> ''Ibid.,'' 9, 493.</ref> preferred to see in this connexion of the origin of the disease with Agni's entering the waters<ref name=fx25_ve1_1095> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p.</ref> an allusion to the fact that fever arises in the rainy season, the time when Agni, as lightning, descends to earth with the rain. Zimmer.<ref name=fx26_ve1_1095> ''Of. cit.,'' 384.</ref> who accepts this view, further refers to the prevalence  of fever in the Terai, and interprets ''vanya,'' an epithet of fever found in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx27_ve1_1095> Av. vi. 20, 4.</ref> as meaning ‘sprung from the forest,’ pointing out that fever is mentioned as prevalent among the '''Mūjavants''' and '''Mahāvṛṣas,''' two mountain tribes of the western Himālaya.<ref name=fx28_ve1_1095> Av. v. 22, 5.</ref> There is no trace of fever having been observed to be caused by the bite of the ''anopheles'' mosquito, which breeds in stagnant water: this theory has without reason been held to be known to classical Indian medicine.<ref name=fx29_ve1_1095> Jolly, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1906, 222.</ref><br><br>Among the symptoms of [[तक्मन्|Takman]], or among complications accompanying it, are mentioned ‘itch’ ('''[[पामन्|Pāman]]'''), ‘headache’ (''śīrṣa-śoka''),<ref name=fx30_ve1_1095> Av. xix. 39, 10.<br><br>For the present position of the disease in India, ''cf.'' the Report of the Simla Conference of 1909.</ref> ‘cough’ ('''Kāsikā'''), and ‘consumption,’ or perhaps some form of itch ('''[[बलास|Balāsa]]''').<br><br>It is perhaps significant that the [[तक्मन्|Takman]] does not appear until the Atharvaveda. It is quite possible that the Vedic Āryans, when first settled in India, did not know the disease, which would take some generations to become endemic and recognized as dangerous. What remedies they used against it is quite uncertain, for the Atharvaveda mentions only spells and the '''[[कुष्ठ|Kuṣṭha]],''' which can hardly have been an effective remedy, though still used in later times. Fever must, even in the [[अथर्वन्|Atharvan]] period, have claimed many victims, or it would not be mentioned so prominently.

तक्वन्
<u>'''Takvan,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_1096> Rv. i. 66, 2. ''Cf.'' i. 134, 5, and '''[[त्सारिन्|Tsārin]].'''</ref> '''Takvarī,'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1096> ''Ibid.,'' i. 151, 5;<br> x. 91, 2. But in both places the word may be adjectival.</ref> seem in the Rigveda to denote a ‘swiftflying bird.’ Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx3_ve1_1096> On Rv. i. 66, 2.</ref> explains [[तक्वन्|Takvan]] as a swift steed.

तक्षक वैशालेय
<u>'''Takṣaka Vaiśāleya'''</u> (‘descendant of Viśālā’) is a mythical figure, mentioned as the son of [[विराज्|Virāj]] in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1097> vii. 10, 29.</ref> and as [[ब्राह्मणाच्छंसिन्|Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin]] priest at the snake sacrifice in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1097> xxv. 15, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 35.</ref> 

तक्षन्
<u>'''1. Takṣan,'''</u> ‘carpenter,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1098> ix. 112, 1.</ref> and often later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1098> Av. x. 6, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 10;<br> xviii. 13;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 27;<br> xxx. 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 2, 1;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 3, 12;<br> iii. 6, 4, 4, etc.</ref> He was employed to do all sorts of work in wood, such as the making of chariots ('''[[रथ|Ratha]]''') and wagons ('''Anas'''). Carved work of a finer type seems also to have fallen to his lot.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1098> Rv. x. 86, 5;<br> Av. xix. 49, 8. ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 161, 9;<br> iii. 60. 2.</ref> The axe (''[[कुलिश|kuliśa]],''<ref name=fx4_ve1_1098> Rv. iii. 2, 1.</ref> ''[[परशु|paraśu]]'')<ref name=fx5_ve1_1098> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 10.</ref> is mentioned as one of his tools, and perhaps the '''[[भुरिज्|Bhurij]],''' a word which is, however, uncertain in sense. In one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve1_1098> Rv. i. 105, 18. ''Cf.'' Roth, ''[[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], Erläuterungen,'' 67;<br> Oldenberg. ''ṚgvedaNoten,'' 1, 100.</ref> reference seems to be made to the pains of the carpenter in bending over his work. That the carpenters were a low caste, or formed a separate class of the people, is certainly not true of Vedic times.<ref name=fx7_ve1_1098> Fick, ''Die sociale Gliederung,'' 210, n. 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 245, 253.</ref>

तक्षन्
<u>'''2. Takṣan'''</u> is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1099> ii. 3, 1, 31-35. ''Cf.'' Lévi, ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 140.</ref> as a teacher whose view of a certain formula was not accepted by '''Jīvala [[चैलकि|Cailaki]].'''

तक्षन्
<u>'''3. Takṣan.'''</u> See '''[[बृबु|Bṛbu]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

तण्डुल
<u>'''Taṇḍula,'''</u> ‘grain,’ especially ‘rice grain,’ is mentioned very often in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1101> x. 9, 26;<br> xi. 1, 18;<br> xii. 3, 18. 29. 30.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1101> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 6;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, x. 1, etc.;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 4, 3;<br> ii. 5, 3, 4;<br> v. 2, 3, 2;<br> vi. 6, 1, 8, etc.;<br> ''[[श्यामाक|śyāmāka]]-[[तण्डुल|taṇḍula]],'' ‘millet grain,’ ''ibid.,'' x. 6, 3, 2;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 14, 3;<br> ''[[अपामार्ग|apāmārga]]-[[तण्डुल|taṇḍula]],'' ‘grain of the ''Achyranthes aspera,''’ v. 2, 4, 15, etc.</ref> but not in the Rigveda. This accords with the fact that rice cultivation seems hardly known in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1101> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 239. See [[व्रीहि|Vrīhi]].</ref> Husked (''karṇa'') and unhusked (''akarṇa'') rice is referred to in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1101> i. 8, 9, 3. See Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 190.</ref> 

तत
<u>'''Tata,'''</u> ‘dada,’ is the pet name for ‘father’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1102> viii. 91, 6;<br> ix. 112, 3.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1102> Av. v. 24, 16;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 5, 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 9, 7;<br> in the vocative as a form of address, Av. viii. 4, 77;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 14;<br> vii. 15;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 3, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 449.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[तात|Tāta]]''' and '''[[पितृ|Pitṛ]].'''

ततामह
<u>'''Tatāmaha,'''</u> ‘grandfather,’ is found in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1103> v. 24, 17;<br> viii. 4, 76. It seems to mean literally ‘great father,’ and to be an analogical formation following ''[[पितामह|pitāmaha]];<br>'' Delbrück, ''op. cit.,'' 473, 474.</ref>

तनय
<u>'''Tanaya,'''</u> n., denotes ‘offspring,’ ‘descendants’ in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1104> i. 96, 4;<br> 183, 3;<br> 184, 5;<br> ii. 23, 19;<br> vii. 1, 21, etc.;<br> ''tokaṃ ca tanayaṃ ca,'' i. 92, 13;<br> ix. 74, 5. ''Cf.'' vi. 25, 4;<br> 31, 1;<br> 66, 8;<br> and i. 31, 12, as explained by Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 193.</ref> where also it is often used adjectivally with '''Toka.'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1104> Rv. i. 64, 14;<br> 114, 6;<br> 147, 1;<br> 189, 2;<br> ii. 30, 5, etc.;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7.</ref> There seems no ground for the view<ref name=fx3_ve1_1104> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], x. 7;<br> xii. 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Tan, tana,'' and ''tanas,'' have the same sense as [[तनय|Tanaya]]. See Rv. vi. 46, 12;<br> 49, 13;<br> vii. 104, 10;<br> viii. 68, 12, etc. (''tan'');<br> viii. 25, 2 (''tana'');<br> v. 70, 4 (''tanas'').</ref> that ''toka'' means ‘sons,’ ‘children,’ and ''[[तनय|tanaya]]'' ‘grandchildren.’

तन्ति
<u>'''Tanti'''</u> occurs in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1105> vi. 24, 4.</ref> where Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_1105> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> renders the plural of the word by ‘files’ of calves. But it seems rather to have the sense which it has in the later literature, of ‘cords,’ here used to fasten the calves.

तन्तु
<u>'''Tantu'''</u> appears properly to mean ‘thread,’ and in particular the ‘warp’ of a piece of weaving, as opposed to '''Otu,''' the ‘woof.’ Both senses are found in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1106> xiv. 2, 51 (opposed to ''otu'');<br> xv. 3, 6 (the ''prāñcaḥ'' and ''tiryañcaḥ'' threads or cords of the throne of the [[व्रात्य|Vrātya]] ['''[[आसन्दी|Āsandī]]''']).</ref> In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1106> iii. 1, 2, 18;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 8, 9.</ref> the ‘warp’ is called ''anuchāda,'' the ‘woof’ ''[[पर्य्आस|paryāsa]],'' the ''tantavaḥ'' being the ‘threads.’ In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1106> vi. 1, 1, 4.</ref>  on the other hand, the ‘warp’ is ''[[प्राचीन-तान|prācīna-tāna]],'' the ‘woof’ ''otu.'' The threads or cords of the throne ('''Pary ṅka''') are referred to in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_1106> i. 5;<br> Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 20, n. 2.</ref><br><br>In the Rigveda the word is used only metaphorically, and this is its most frequent use even in the Brāhmanas.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1106> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' It is applied to the filaments of plants in Rv. x. 134, 5;<br> to the spider's web in Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upanisad. ii. 1, 23.</ref> See also '''[[वाण|Vāṇa]].'''

तन्त्र
<u>'''Tantra'''</u> means, like '''[[तन्तु|Tantu]],''' the ‘warp’ of a piece of weaving, or more generally the ‘web’ itself. It is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1107> x. 71, 9.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1107> Av. x. 7, 42;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 5, 3;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], x. 5;<br> Śatapa ha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 2, 2, 22.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 254.</ref>

तपस्
<u>'''Tapas, Tapasya.'''</u> See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

तपो-नित्य
<u>'''Tapo-nitya'''</u> (‘constant in penance’) [[पौरु-शिष्टि|Pauru-śiṣṭi]] (‘descendant of Puruśiṣṭa’) is the name of a teacher in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (i. 9, 1) who believed in the value of penance (''[[तपस्|tapas]]'').<br>==Foot Notes==

तयादर
<u>'''Tayādara'''</u> is the name of an animal only mentioned in the adjectival form ''[[तायादर|tāyādara]]'' along with '''[[परस्वन्त्|Parasvant]],''' ‘wild ass’(?) in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1110> vi. 72, 2. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 335.</ref>

तरक्षु
<u>'''Tarakṣu,'''</u> the ‘hyæna,’ is mentioned in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or horse sacrifice, in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1111> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 19, 1, where Sāyaṇa explains the animal to be ‘a kind of tiger with an ass's appearance’ (''[[व्याघ्र|vyāghra]]-viśeṣo gardabhākāraḥ'');<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 21;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 40.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 81.</ref> 

तरन्त
<u>'''Taranta'''</u> appears, along with '''Purumīḍha,''' as a patron of '''[[श्यावाश्व|Śyāvāśva]]''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1112> v. 61, 10.</ref> In the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1112> xiii. 7, 12.</ref> and other Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx3_ve1_1112> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 139;<br> Śāṭyāyanaka ''apud'' Sāyaṇa on Rv. ix. 38, 3 = [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]], ii. 410.</ref> he, together with Purumīḍha, is described as receiving gifts from '''[[ध्वस्र|Dhvasra]]'''<ref name=fx4_ve1_1112> Rv. ix. 58, 3.</ref> and '''[[पुरुषन्ति|Puruṣanti]];''' but since the receipt of gifts was forbidden to Kṣatriyas, they for the nonce became [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]], and composed a passage in honour of the donors.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1112/> He, like Purumīḍha, was a [[वैदद्अश्वि|Vaidadaśvi]], or son of Vidadaśva.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1112> ''Cf.'' Rv. v. 61, 10;<br> notes 2 and 3. This is merely a misunderstanding of the Rv. ''Cf.'' Oertel, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 39;<br> Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 50 ''et seq.;<br>'' 62, 63;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 232, n. 1;<br> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 353, 354, where he points out that the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] tradition, and that of the Bṛhaddevatā (v. 50-81, with Macdonell's notes), are not to be accepted as real explanations of the Rigveda.</ref>

तरु
<u>'''Taru,'''</u> the usual term for ‘tree’ in classical Sanskrit, never occurs in Vedic literature, except perhaps in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1113> v. 44, 5.</ref> where Sāyaṇa finds it, and where it can be so translated. But the form (''tarubhiḥ'') is probably to be interpreted otherwise.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1113> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' cites ''tarobhiḥ'' in Rv. ii. 39, 3, as a parallel, and so Oldenberg, ''ṚgvedaNoten,'' 1, 341.</ref>

तरुक्ष
<u>'''Tarukṣa'''</u> is the name of a man in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1114> viii. 46, 32. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 391;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 117.</ref> who is mentioned along with '''[[बल्बूथ|Balbūtha]],''' the '''[[दास|Dāsa]],''' in a [[दान|Dāna]]-[[स्तुति|stuti]], or ‘Praise of Gifts.’

तर्कु
<u>'''Tarku,'''</u> ‘spindle,’ is known only in Vedic literature from the mention of it in Yāska's [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (ii. 1) as an example of the transposition of letters, the word being derived, according to him, from the root ''kart,'' ‘to spin.’ <br>==Foot Notes==

तर्द
<u>'''Tarda,'''</u> ‘borer,’ occurs in a hymn of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1116> vi. 50, 1. 2.</ref> enumerating insects that injure grain. Whitney<ref name=fx2_ve1_1116> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 318.</ref> suggests that a kind of mouse or rat may be meant. Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_1116> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 485.</ref> thought a bird was denoted.

तर्द्मन्
<u>'''Tardman'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1117> xiv. 1, 40.</ref> applies to the hole in the yoke ('''Yuga'''). In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1117> iii. 2, 1, 2;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 26, n. 1.</ref> it designates a hole in a skin.

तर्य
<u>'''Tarya'''</u> is, according to Sāyaṇa, the name of a man in one passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1118> v, 44, 12. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 158, 159.</ref> But the verse is hopelessly obscure.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1118> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 342.</ref>

तलाश
<u>'''Talāśa'''</u> is the name of a tree in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1119> vi. 15, 3.</ref> Whitney<ref name=fx2_ve1_1119> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 291.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 62.</ref> suggests that it may be the same as ''tālīśa (Flacourtia cataphracta).''

तल्प
<u>'''Talpa'''</u> is the regular term for ‘bed’ or ‘couch’ from the Rigveda and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1120> Rv. vii. 55, 8;<br> Av. v. 17, 12;<br> xiv. 2, 31. 41.</ref> onwards.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1120> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 6, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 5, 3;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxiii. 4, 2;<br> xxv. 1, 10.</ref> One made of '''[[उदुम्बर|Udumbara]]''' wood is mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_1120> i. 2, 6, 5.</ref> The violation of the bed of a Guru, or teacher, is already mentioned in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx4_ve1_1120> v. 10, 9.</ref> while the adjective ''talpya,'' ‘born in the nuptial couch,’ denotes ‘legitimate’ in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx5_ve1_1120> xiii. 1, 6, 2. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 154.</ref> 

तलव
<u>'''Talava'''</u> in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha, or human sacrifice, in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1121> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 20;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 15, 1. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 83, n. 15.</ref> denotes a ‘musician’ of some kind.

तष्टृ
<u>'''Taṣṭṛ'''</u> is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1122> i. 61, 4;<br> 105, 18;<br> 130, 4;<br> iii. 38, 1;<br> vii. 32, 20;<br> x. 93, 12;<br> 119, 5. ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 21.</ref> in the sense of ‘carpenter,’ like '''[[तक्षन्|Takṣan]],''' which is from the same root ''takṣ,'' ‘to fashion.’

तसर
<u>'''Tasara'''</u> denotes the weaver's ‘shuttle’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1123> x. 130, 2.</ref> and the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1123> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 83;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 9;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxviii. 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 4, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 254.</ref>

तस्कर
<u>'''Taskara'''</u> occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1124> i. 191, 5;<br> vi. 27, 3;<br> vii. 55, 3;<br> viii. 29, 6.</ref> and frequently later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1124> Av. iv. 3, 2;<br> xix. 47, 7;<br> 50, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xi. 77-78;<br> xii. 62;<br> xvi. 21, etc;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 14.</ref> denoting ‘thief’ or ‘robber.’ It appears to be practically synonymous with '''[[स्तेन|Stena]],''' in connexion with which it is often mentioned.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1124> Rv. vii. 55. 3;<br> Av. xix. 47, 7;<br> 50, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xi. 79;<br> xvi. 21, etc.</ref> The [[स्तेन|Stena]] and the [[तस्कर|Taskara]] are contrasted in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx4_ve1_1124> xi. 79 (the [[मलिम्लु|Malimlu]] is ''janeṣu,'' ‘among men’;<br> the others ''vane,'' ‘in the forest’). ''Cf.'' for the [[मलिम्लु|Malimlu]], [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 3, 2, 6;<br> Atharvaveda, xix. 49, 10.</ref> with the '''[[मलिम्लु|Malimlu]],''' who is a burglar or house-breaker, while they are highwaymen, or, as the Rigveda<ref name=fx5_ve1_1124> x. 4, 6.</ref> puts it, ‘men who haunt the woods and risk their lives’ (''tanū-tyajā vanar-gū''). In another passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1124> vii. 55, 3.</ref> however, the dog is told to bark at the [[तस्कर|Taskara]] or the [[स्तेन|Stena]], which clearly points to an attempt at house-breaking. The thief goes about at night,<ref name=fx7_ve1_1124> Rv. i. 191, 5.</ref> and knows the paths<ref name=fx8_ve1_1124> Rv. viii. 29, 6.</ref> on which he attacks his victim. In one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx9_ve1_1124> x. 4, 6.</ref> the use of cords is mentioned, but whether to bind the thieves when captured, or to bind the  victim, is not clear.<ref name=fx10_ve1_1124> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 178, n.</ref> The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx11_ve1_1124> xix. 50, 5. ''Cf.'' Rv. x. 97, 10 (''[[स्तेन|stena]]'').</ref> refers to the [[स्तेन|Stena]] and the [[तस्कर|Taskara]] as cattle and horse thieves.<ref name=fx12_ve1_1124> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 984.</ref>

तायु
<u>'''Tāyu'''</u> was another name for thief, perhaps of a less distinguished and more domestic character than the highwayman, for though he is referred to as a cattle-thief,<ref name=fx13_ve1_1125> Rv. i. 65, 1;<br> vii. 86, 5.</ref> he is also alluded to as a stealer of clothes (''[[वस्त्र|vastra]]-mathi'')<ref name=fx14_ve1_1125> Rv. iv. 38, 5.</ref> and as a debtor.<ref name=fx15_ve1_1125> Rv. vi. 12, 5. No doubt this theft is the result of despair at being in debt, which might lead to loss of liberty ([[ऋण|Ṛṇa]]).</ref> In one passage the Tāyus are said to disappear at the coming of dawn (which is elsewhere called ''yāvayad-dveṣas,'' ‘driving away hostile beings,’ and ''ṛta-pā,'' ‘guardian of order’), like the stars of heaven (''[[नक्षत्र|nakṣatra]]'').<ref name=fx16_ve1_1125> Rv. i. 50, 2. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 47.</ref><br><br>In the [[शतरुद्रिय|Śatarudriya]] litany of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx17_ve1_1125> xvi. 20, 21. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 4, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 13;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 4.</ref> Rudra is called lord of assailers (''ā-vyādhin''), thieves (''[[स्तेन|stena]]''), robbers (''[[तस्कर|taskara]]''), pickpockets (''stāyu''), stealers (''muṣṇant''), and cutters (''vi-kṛnta''); and designations of sharpers (''gṛtsa'') and bands (''gaṇa, [[व्रात|vrāta]]''), apparently of robbers, are mentioned.<ref name=fx18_ve1_1125> xvi. 25.</ref> It is therefore not surprising that the Rigveda<ref name=fx19_ve1_1125> i. 129, 9;<br> ii. 23, 16;<br> vi. 24, 10;<br> 41, 5;<br> 51, 15;<br> x. 63, 16.</ref> should contain many prayers for safety at home or on the way, or that the Atharvaveda should devote several hymns to night<ref name=fx20_ve1_1125> Av. xix. 47-50.</ref> chiefly for protection against the evil doings of thieves and robbers.<br><br>Pischel<ref name=fx21_ve1_1125> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 55, 56. Contrast 1, 106.</ref> suggests that in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx22_ve1_1125> Rv. vii. 55.</ref> '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]]''' is represented as a burglar, but the admits that, since [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] was attacking the house of his father Varuṇa, he was only seeking to obtain what he may have regarded as his own. But the interpretation of the hymn is not certain.<ref name=fx23_ve1_1125> ''Cf.'' Aufrecht, ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 337 ''et seq.;<br>'' Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 370;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 308;<br> Bṛhaddevatā, vii. 11 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes.</ref><br><br>Sāyaṇa's explanation of one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx24_ve1_1125> vi. 54, 1.</ref> as  referring to professional cattle-trackers, like the Khojis of the Panjab, seems quite probable.<ref name=fx25_ve1_1125> Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 182, 183, citing Elliot, ''Memoirs,'' 1, 276;<br> Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 123.</ref><br><br>The punishment of thieves appears primarily to have been left to the action of the robbed. The practice of binding them in stocks<ref name=fx26_ve1_1125> ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 24, 13, 15;<br> vii. 86, 5;<br> Av. vi. 63, 3 = 84, 4;<br> 115, 2. 3;<br> 121;<br> xix. 47, 9;<br> 50, 1, all of which passages are cited by Zimmer, 181, 182, to prove this practice. But it must be noted that Rv. vii. 86, 5, alone is not at all conclusive evidence, though Av. xix. 47, 9;<br> 50, 1 (''drupade āhan''), probably mean the same thing. Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 976, 983, renders the passages as referring to casting a thief into a snare, and Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 106, makes Rv. vii. 86, 5, refer to the cattle-thief (''[[पशु|paśu]]-tṛp'') taking away the rope from the calf he means to steal. For Rv. x. 4, 6, see above, n. 10. The German and Slavonic parallels cited by Zimmer, 182, n., support his view. See also for a similar punishment in case of debt, '''[[ऋण|Ṛṇa]].'''</ref> seems clearly referred to. But later, at any rate-and in all probability earlier also, as in othe countries--a more severe penalty could be exacted, and death inflicted by the king.<ref name=fx27_ve1_1125> [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 4345;<br> Āpastamba [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 9, 25, 4. 5;<br> Jolly, ''op. cit.,'' 124.</ref> There is no hint in Vedic literature of the mode of conviction; a fire ordeal is not known to the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx28_ve1_1125> Av. ii. 12 was so interpreted by Schlagintweit, ''Die Gottesurtheile der Inder,'' 9 ''et seq.'' (1866);<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 164 ''et seq.;<br>'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 445;<br> Zimmer, 183 ''et seq.;<br>'' but see Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 11, 330 ''et seq.;<br> Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 294-296;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 54;<br> Grill, ''Hundert Lieder,''^2 47, 85;<br> Jolly, ''op cit.,'' 146.</ref> and the ordeal known to the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx29_ve1_1125> vi. 16;<br> Jolly, ''loc. cit.''</ref> is not said to be used in the case of theft. No doubt the stolen property was recovered by the person robbed if he could obtain it. Nothing is known as to what happened if the property had passed from the actual thief into the possession of another person.

तस्तुव
<u>'''Tastuva,'''</u> or '''Tasruva,''' as the Paippalāda recension has it, is the name of a remedy against snake poison, and is mentioned along with '''[[ताबुव|Tābuva]]''' in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1126> v. 13, 10, 11. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 428;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 244.</ref> 

ताजद्-भङ्ग
<u>'''Tājad-bhaṅga'''</u> (‘easily broken’) is apparently the name of a tree or plant in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1127> viii. 8, 3 (a battle hymn).</ref> The [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1127> xvi 14. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield's edition, xliv;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 583, 584;<br> Caland, ''Altindisches Zauberritual,'' 35;<br> Lanman in Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 502;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 72.</ref> treats it as a compound word, and its commentator makes it out to be the castor-oil plant (''[[एरण्ड|eraṇḍa]]''). Whitney,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1127> ''Op. cit.,'' 504.</ref> however, treats the expression as two separate words, and thinks that the passage means ‘may they be broken suddenly (''tājat'') like hemp (''bhañga'').’

ताण्ड
<u>'''Tāṇḍa'''</u> seems to be the name of a sage to whose school belonged the [[ताण्ड|Tāṇḍa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] mentioned in the Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1128> vii. 10, 17. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 49.</ref>

ताण्ड-विन्द
<u>'''Tāṇḍa-vinda,'''</u> or '''[[ताण्ड|Tāṇḍa]]-vindava,''' is the name of a teacher mentioned in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1129> viii. 10. The manuscripts differ as to the form of the name.</ref>

ताण्डि
<u>'''Tāṇḍi'''</u> occurs as the name of a pupil of '''[[बादरायण|Bādarāyaṇa]]''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) at the end of the Sāmavidhāna [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1130> See Konow's Translation, 80, n. 2.</ref>

ताण्ड्य
<u>'''Tāṇḍya'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1131> vi. 1, 2, 25. ''Cf.'' Lévi, ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 140.</ref> quoted on a point bearing on the Agniciti, or piling of the sacred fire. He is also mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1131> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373, 384.</ref> The [[ताण्ड्य|Tāṇḍya]] [[महाब्राह्मण|Mahābrāhmaṇa]] or [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1131> Edited in the ''Bibliotheca Indica'' Series, 1869-74. See Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 66 ''et seq.,'' 74, 133;<br> Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 203, 210;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 23 ''et seq.''</ref> of the [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]] represents the school of the Tāṇḍins. 

तात
<u>'''Tāta,'''</u> apparently ‘dada's boy,’ an affectionate term of address by a father (''cf.'' '''Tata''') to a son, is found in the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1132> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 14, 4;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 6;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 4, 2.</ref> occurring in the vocative only. But in the sense of ‘father,’ through confusion with Tata, it occurs also as early as the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1132> i. 3, 3, where Tata and [[तात|Tāta]] are given as variant forms of the address of the child to the father. Little, ''Grammatical Index,'' 75, takes [[तात|Tāta]] to mean ‘father’ primarily, but this seems unlikely.<br><br>''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 449, 454.</ref>

तादुरी
<u>'''Tādurī'''</u> is mentioned in a verse of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1133> iv. 15, 14.</ref> together with the female frog ('''Maṇḍūkī'''). Some similar animal must be meant,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1133> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 175.</ref> but Roth,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1133> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' where he suggests ''tāḍurī,'' from the root ''taḍ,'' ‘beat,’ with the sense of ‘splashing.’</ref> with the commentator [[दुर्ग|Durga]] on the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx4_ve1_1133> ix. 7.</ref> regards the word as an adjective describing the frog.

तान्व
<u>'''1. Tānva'''</u> in an obscure passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1134> iii. 31, 2.</ref> seems to mean a ‘legitimate son,’ who is said not to leave the heritage (''[[रिक्थ|riktha]]'') of his father to his sister (''[[जामि|jāmi]]''). The exact meaning is probably unascertainable,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1134> ''Cf.'' Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 348;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]] Noten,'' 1, 240;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 34.</ref> but the passage may convey a statement of what was no doubt the fact, that the daughter had no share in the paternal inheritance; her brother had to provide for her during her life if she remained unmarried, but she had no independent portion.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1134> ''Cf.'' Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 87, for the modern law of the Panjab.</ref> (See '''[[दाय|Dāya]].''')

तान्व
<u>'''2. Tānva'''</u> appears to be a patronymic, ‘descendant of Tanva,’ in a verse of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1135> x. 93, 15.</ref> Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_1135> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 166.</ref> thinks that it is the patronymic of '''[[दुःशीम|Duḥśīma]],''' who is mentioned in the preceding verse, but this is uncertain. 

तापस
<u>'''1. Tāpasa,'''</u> ‘ascetic,’ is not found in Vedic literature till the Upaniṣads.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1136> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 3, 22. ''Cf.'' Fick, ''Die sociale Gliederung,'' 40.</ref>

तापस
<u>'''2. Tāpasa'''</u> is a name of '''Datta''' who was [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] priest at the snake festival described in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xxv. 15).<br>==Foot Notes==

ताबुव
<u>'''Tābuva'''</u> is the name in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1138> v. 13, 10.</ref> of a remedy against snake poison. The Paippalāda recension has Tāvuca instead. Weber<ref name=fx2_ve1_1138> Proceedings of the Berlin Academy, 1896, 681.</ref> thinks that the original form was Tāthuva, from the root ''sthā,'' ‘stand,’ and that it meant ‘stopping’; but this is hardly probable.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1138> Barth. ''Revne del'Histoire des Religions,'' 39, 26. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 244;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 428.</ref>

तायादर
<u>'''Tāyādara,'''</u> ‘belonging to the '''[[तयादर|Tayādara]]'''’ (Av. vi. 72, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

तायु
<u>'''Tāyu,'''</u> ‘thief,’ is mentioned several times in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1140> i. 50, 2;<br> 65, 1;<br> iv. 38, 5;<br> v. 15, 5;<br> 52, 12;<br> vi. 12, 5;<br> vii. 86, 5 (''[[पशु|paśu]]-tṛṭ,'' ‘cattle-thief,’ see Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 106).</ref> See '''[[तस्कर|Taskara]].'''

तारका
<u>'''Tārakā'''</u> is found several times in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1141> ii. 8, 1;<br> iii. 7, 4;<br> vi. 121, 3;<br> xix. 49, 8.</ref> denoting a star. The masculine form Tāraka occurs in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1141> i. 5, 2, 5.</ref>

तारुक्ष्य
<u>'''Tārukṣya'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1142> iii. 1, 6.</ref> and [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyakas.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1142> vii. 19.</ref> In the former passage [[तार्क्ष्य|Tārkṣya]] is a variant reading, and in the latter [[तार्क्ष्य|Tārkṣya]] is read, but this is probably only due to confusion with [[तार्क्ष्य|Tārkṣya]], the reputed author of a Rigvedic hymn.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1142> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 5, 2, with Keith's note;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] xi. 14, 28;<br> xii. 11, 12, Āśvalāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 1.</ref> 

तार्क्ष्य
<u>'''Tārkṣya'''</u> is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1143> i. 89, 6;<br> x. 178.</ref> as a divine steed, apparently the sun conceived as a horse.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1143> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 149.</ref> But Foy,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1143> Kuhn's ''Zeitschrift,'' 11, 366, 367.</ref> judging by the name, apparently a patronymic of '''[[तृक्षि|Tṛkṣi]],''' who is known from the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_1143> viii. 22, 7.</ref> onwards as a descendant of '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]],''' thinks that a real steed, the property of [[तृक्षि|Tṛkṣi]], is meant; but this is not very probable.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1143> In [[खिल|Khila]], ii. 4, 1, [[तार्क्ष्य|Tārkṣya]] is represented as a bird (''[[वायस|vāyasa]]''), also a symbol of the sun. In the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xv. 18, he is mentioned with Ariṣṭanemi, originally an epithet of his (Rv. i. 89, 6;<br> x. 178, 1), as a person, and in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 3, 13, he appears as Vaipaśyata ([[वैपश्चित|Vaipaścita]] in Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 7), king of the birds (''cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 369).</ref> See also '''[[तारुक्ष्य|Tārukṣya]].'''

तार्प्य
<u>'''Tārpya'''</u> denotes, in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1144> xviii. 4, 31.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1144> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 11, 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 7, 1;<br> 7, 6, 4;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxi. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 5, 20;<br> Kātyāyana Śranta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 5, 7 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 12, 19.</ref> a garment made of some material, the nature of which is uncertain. The commentators on the Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1144> v. 3, 5, 20. ''Cf.'' Kātyāyana, ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Sāyaṇa on Av., ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 879.</ref> suggest that a linen garment, or one thrice soaked in ghee, or one made of the ''tṛpā'' or of the ''triparṇa'' plant, is meant: it is doubtful whether the sense was known even to the author of the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] himself. Goldstücker's<ref name=fx4_ve1_1144> Dictionary, ''s.v. abhiṣecanīya.''</ref> rendering of the word is ‘silken garment,’ which Eggeling<ref name=fx5_ve1_1144> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 85, n. 1.</ref> is inclined to accept.^6

तार्ष्टाघ
<u>'''Tārṣṭāgha,'''</u> a species of tree, is mentioned in the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1145> xxv. 23.</ref> while the adjective formed from it, ''tārṣṭāghī,'' ‘derived from the [[तार्ष्टाघ|Tārṣṭāgha]] tree,’ is found in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1145> v. 29, 15. ''Cf.'' Whitney's note in his Translation of the Atharvaveda.</ref> Weber<ref name=fx3_ve1_1145> ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 280.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 62.</ref> thinks that the ''[[सर्षप|sarṣapa]],'' or mustard plant, is meant. 

तितü
<u>'''Titaü'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_1146> On the peculiar form of this word, ''of.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' 20, 3.</ref> is found once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1146> x. 71, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 238.</ref> denoting a ‘sieve,’ or perhaps ‘winnowing fan,’ which was used for purifying corn (''[[सक्तु|saktu]]'').

तित्तिर
<u>'''Tittira, Tittiri,'''</u> is the name of the partridge in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_1147> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 1, 2;<br> v. 5, 16, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 10;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 30, 36. The form [[तित्तिर|Tittira]] occurs in the Maitrāyaṇī Samhitā, iii. 14, 1.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1147> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 5;<br> v. 5, 4, 6;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 154, 6 (Oertel, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 181).<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 91;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 251.</ref> being presumably an onomatopoetic formation. The bird is described as having variegated plumage (''bahu-rūpa''). It is usually associated with the '''[[कपिञ्जल|Kapiñjala]]''' and '''[[कलविङ्क|Kalaviṅka]].'''

तिथि
<u>'''Tithi,'''</u> as the name of a lunar day, the thirtieth part of a lunar month of rather over twenty-seven days, is only found in the later Sūtras,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1148> Gobhila [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 1, 13;<br> ii. 8, 12, 20;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 25;<br> v. 2, etc.</ref> being completely unknown to the Brāhmaṇas, in which the only day is the natural one.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1148> Thibaut, ''Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik,'' 7, 8.</ref> See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''

तिमिर्घ दौरे-श्रुत
<u>'''Timirgha Daure-śruta'''</u> (‘descendant of Dūreśruta’) is mentioned as Agnīdh (‘fire-kindling’) priest at the snake sacrifice described in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1149> xxv. 15. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 35.</ref>

तिरश्च
<u>'''Tiraśca'''</u> is read in some manuscripts of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1150> xv. 3, 5. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 776;<br> Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Araṇyaka,'' 19, n. 3.</ref> in the description of the Vrātya's throne ('''[[आसन्दी|Āsandī]]'''), meaning ‘the cross-pieces.’ But the reading should be ''tiraścye,'' which is adjectival, and is used in the same sense. 

तिरश्च-राजि
<u>'''Tiraśca-rāji,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_1151> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 10, 2;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 94, 95, reports this form from the Av., but the text and Roth (St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'') read ''tiraści-rāji'' there.</ref> '''Tiraści-rāji,'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1151> Av. iii. 27, 2;<br> vi. 56, 2;<br> vii. 56, 1;<br> x. 4, 13;<br> xii. 3, 56.</ref> '''Tiraścīna-rāji,'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1151> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 13, 21;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 27.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 488, 553;<br> Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 68, n. 2;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 295-297.</ref> are variant forms of a name for ‘snake’ (lit., ‘striped across’), found in the later Saṃhitās.

तिरश्ची
<u>'''Tiraścī'''</u> is, according to the Anukramaṇī, the author of a Rigvedic hymn<ref name=fx1_ve1_1152> viii. 95, 4.</ref> in which he appeals to Indra to hear his call. The [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1152> xii. 6, 12.</ref> adopts this view of the name, and mentions a [[तिरश्ची|Tiraścī]] [[आङ्गिरस|Āṅgirasa]]. But Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_1152> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 115. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 5, 187;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 90;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 273.</ref> thinks that the word is not a proper name at all.

तिरश्चीन-वंश
<u>'''Tiraścīna-vaṃśa,'''</u> ‘cross-beam,’ is used to denote a ‘beehive’ in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1153> iii. 1, 1. ''Cf.'' Little, ''Grammatical Index,'' 75.</ref> See also '''[[वंश|Vaṃśa]].'''

तिरिन्दिर
<u>'''Tirindira'''</u> is mentioned in a Dānastuti, or ‘Praise of Gifts,’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1154> viii. 6, 46-48.</ref> as having, along with '''[[पर्शु|Parśu]],''' bestowed gifts on the singer. In the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1154> xvi. 11. 20.</ref> this statement is represented by a tale that the [[कण्व|Kaṇva]] [[वत्स|Vatsa]] obtained a gift from [[तिरिन्दिर|Tirindira]] [[पारशव्य|Pāraśavya]], [[तिरिन्दिर|Tirindira]] and [[पर्शु|Parśu]] being in this version thus treated as one and the same man. Ludwig<ref name=fx3_ve1_1154> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 160, 161;<br> 5, 142.</ref> sees in the Rigvedic passage a proof that the Yadus had gained a victory over [[तिरिन्दिर|Tirindira]], and gave a part of the booty to the singers; but there is no proof whatever of the correctness of this interpretation, which Zimmer<ref name=fx4_ve1_1154> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 136, 137.</ref> shows to be most unlikely. Yadu princes must be meant by [[तिरिन्दिर|Tirindira]] and  [[पर्शु|Parśu]], though Weber<ref name=fx5_ve1_1154> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 356, n.;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 3, 4;<br> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 37, 38.</ref> thinks that the singers were Yadus, not the princes. The latter he holds to have been Iranian (''cf.'', and see '''[[पर्शु|Parśu]]'''), and he thinks that in this there is evidence of continual close relations between India and Iran. This is perfectly possible, but the evidence for it is rather slight.(**  6 For the recent controversy as to Iranian names found at Boghaz-kio7i, ''cf.'' Jacobi, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 721 ''et seq.;'' Oldenberg, ''ibid.,'' 1095-1100; Keith, ''ibid.,'' 1100-1106; Sayce, ''ibid.,'' 1106, 1107; Kennedy, ''ibid.,'' 1107-1119. Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 94 ''et seq.,'' argues in favour of an early connexion of Iranians and Indians in Arachosia, where he places part of the action of the Rigveda. Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 16, 277, holds that traces of Iranian connexion are signs of late date; Arnold, ''ibid.,'' 18, 205 ''et seq.,'' opposes this view.

तिरीट
<u>'''Tirīṭa'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_1155> Meaning, according to later native lexicographers, ‘head-dress’ or ‘diadem.’</ref> is found in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1155> viii. 6, 7. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 265;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 495.</ref> in the adjectival derivative ''tirīṭin'' used of a demon, and presumably meaning ‘adorned with a tiara.’

तिर्य
<u>'''Tirya'''</u> occurs in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1156> iv. 7, 3.</ref> as an epithet of '''[[करम्भ|Karambha]],''' ‘gruel.’ It is probably equivalent to ''tilya,'' ‘made of sesamum,’ as rendered by Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_1156> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> and Whitney,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1156> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 155.</ref> but ''tiriya'' is read by Roth<ref name=fx4_ve1_1156> See Whitney, ''loc. cit.,'' with Lanman's additional note. Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 377, construes the adjective with ''viṣam,'' and renders ‘the poison which comes in a horizontal direction’ (''cf. tiryañc''). Grill, ''Hundert Lieder,''^2 121, amends to ''atiriya,'' ‘overflowing.’<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 270;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 201.</ref> in the Rāja-nighaṇṭu as a kind of rice.

तिर्यञ्च् आङ्गिरस
<u>'''Tiryañc Āṅgirasa'''</u> is mentioned as a seer of Sāmans, or Chants, in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1157> xii. 6, 12. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 160.</ref> The name is doubtless feigned. 

तिल
<u>'''Tila'''</u> denotes in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1158> ii. 8, 3;<br> vi. 140, 2;<br> xviii. 3, 69;<br> 4, 32.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1158> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 2, 10, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 12;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 1, 1, 3, etc.</ref> the sesamum plant, and particularly its grains, from which a rich oil ('''[[तैल|Taila]]''') was extracted. It is often<ref name=fx3_ve1_1158> Av. vi. 140, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 3, 22;<br> Chāndogva [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 10, 6, etc.</ref> mentioned in connexion with '''[[माष|Māṣa]],''' ‘kidney bean.’ The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx4_ve1_1158> ''Loc. cit.''</ref> attributes the bean and the sesamum to the winter (''[[हेमन्त|hemanta]]'') and the cool (''[[शिशिर|śiśira]]'') seasons. The stalk of the sesamum plant (''tila-piñjī,''<ref name=fx5_ve1_1158> Av. ii. 8, 3.</ref> ''til-piñja''<ref name=fx6_ve1_1158> Av. xii. 2, 54.</ref>) was used for fuel, and the seed was boiled in the form of porridge (''tilaudana''<ref name=fx7_ve1_1158> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 16;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 8.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 240.</ref>) for food.

तिल्वक
<u>'''Tilvaka'''</u> is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1159> xiii. 8, 1, 16.</ref> as a tree (''Symplocos racemosa''), near which it is inauspicious to construct a grave. The adjectival derivative ''tailvaka,'' ‘made of the wood of the [[तिल्वक|Tilvaka]],’ is found in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1159> iii. 1, 9.</ref> and is employed to describe the ''[[यूप|yūpa]],'' or sacrificial post, in the Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_1159> iii. 8.</ref>

तिष्य
<u>'''Tiṣya'''</u> occurs twice in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1160> v. 54, 13;<br> x. 64, 8 (with [[कृशानु|Kṛśānu]] as in archer).</ref> apparently as the name of a star,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1160> Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 290;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 355;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 331;<br> Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 77, n. 1.</ref> though Sāyaṇa takes it to mean the sun. It is doubtless identical with the Avestan Tistrya. Later it is the name of a lunar mansion: see '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''

तिसृ-धन्व
<u>'''Tisṛ-dhanva,'''</u> ‘a bow with three (arrows),’ is mentioned as a gift to the priest at the sacrifice in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1161> i. 8, 19, 1.</ref> and in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1161> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 3, 4;<br> ii. 7, 9, 2;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 1, 5, 10;<br> xiv. 1, 1, 7.</ref> 

तुग्र
<u>'''Tugra'''</u> appears in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1162> i. 116, 3;<br> 117, 14;<br> vi. 62, 6.</ref> as the name of the father of '''[[भुज्यु|Bhujyu]],''' a protégé of the Aśvins, who is accordingly called [[तुग्र्य|Tugrya]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1162> Rv. viii. 3, 23;<br> 74, 14.</ref> or [[तौग्र्य|Taugrya]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_1162> Rv. i. 117, 15;<br> 118, 6;<br> 182, 5. 6;<br> viii. 5, 22;<br> x. 39, 4.</ref> A different [[तुग्र|Tugra]] seems to be referred to in other passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_1162> vi. 20, 8;<br> 26, 4;<br> x. 49, 4. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 55, 328, 329;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 157.</ref> as an enemy of Indra.

तुग्र्य
<u>'''Tugrya'''</u> occurs in the Rigveda as a patronymic of '''[[भुज्यु|Bhujyu]],'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_1163> Who is also called ''Tugrasya [[सूनु|sūnu]],'' Rv. vi. 62, 6. ''Cf.'' the use of ''[[पज्रिय|Pajriya]]'' and perhaps ''Kṛṣṇiya'' in the patronymic sense without Vṛddhi.</ref> but also in a passage<ref name=fx2_ve1_1163> viii. 32, 20.</ref> in which no reference to [[भुज्यु|Bhujyu]] appears to be meant, and in which it may mean ‘a man of the house of [[तुग्र|Tugra]].’ A similar sense seems to occur in the locative plural feminine in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1163> i. 33, 15. ''Cf.'' Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 47.</ref> where (supplying ''vikṣu'') the meaning must be ‘among the Tugrians.’ This explanation may also apply to the epithet of Indra<ref name=fx4_ve1_1163> viii. 45, 29;<br> 99, 7.</ref> or Soma,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1163> viii. 1, 15, where, however, Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' suggests an alteration to make it refer to Indra.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 128.</ref> ''tugryā-vṛdh,'' ‘rejoicing among the Tugrians.’

तुच्
<u>'''Tuc'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1164> viii. 18, 18;<br> 27, 14;<br> vi. 48, 9.</ref> occasionally occurs denoting ‘children.’ Tuj occurs rather more often in the same sense.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1164> iii. 45, 4;<br> iv. 1, 3;<br> v. 41, 9;<br> viii. 4, 15.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[तनय|Tanaya]]''' and '''Toka.'''

तुजि
<u>'''Tuji'''</u> is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1165> vi. 26, 4;<br> x. 49, 4.</ref> of a protégé of Indra, who in another hymn<ref name=fx2_ve1_1165> vi. 20, 8. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 156;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 55, 328.</ref> appears to be called [[तूतुजि|Tūtuji]].

तुमिञ्ज औपोदिति
<u>'''Tumiñja Aupoditi'''</u> is mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (i. 7, 2, 1) as a [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] priest at a Sattra, or ‘sacrificial session,’ and as having been engaged in a discussion with '''[[सुश्रवस्|Suśravas]].''' <br>==Foot Notes==

तुर कावषेय
<u>'''Tura Kāvaṣeya'''</u> is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) at the end of the tenth book of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1167> x. 6, 5, 9.</ref> as the source of the doctrine set forth in that book, and as separated, in the succession of teachers, from '''[[शाण्डिल्य|Śāṇḍilya]]''' by '''Yajñavacas''' and '''Kuśri.''' In the same [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1167> ix. 5, 2, 15.</ref> he is quoted by [[शाण्डिल्य|Śāṇḍilya]] as having erected a fire-altar on the '''[[कारोती|Kārotī]].''' In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1167> iv. 27;<br> vii. 34;<br> viii. 21.</ref> he appears as a [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], or ‘domestic priest,’ of '''[[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]] [[पारिक्षित|Pārikṣita]],''' whom he consecrated king. In the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_1167> vi. 5, 4 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]], not in Mādhyaṃdina).</ref> and a [[खिल|Khila]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_1167> i. 9, 6;<br> Scheftelowitz, ''Die Apokryphen des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 65, 190.</ref> he appears as an ancient sage. Oldenberg,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1167> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 239.</ref> no doubt rightly, assigns him to the end of the Vedic period. He is probably<ref name=fx7_ve1_1167> So the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> identical with Tura, the ''[[देव-मुनि|deva-muni]],'' ‘saint of the gods,’ who is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx8_ve1_1167> xxv. 14, 5. See Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 68.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 203, n.;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 120, 131;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 43, xviii.</ref>

तुर-श्रवस्
<u>'''Tura-śravas'''</u> is the name of a seer mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1168> ix. 4, 10. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 53;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 316.</ref> as having pleased Indra by two Sāmans (Chants) of his composition. Indra in return appears to have given him the oblation of the '''Pārāvatas''' on the '''[[यमुना|Yamunā]].'''

तुर्य-वाह्
<u>'''Turya-vāh,'''</u> masc.; '''Turyauhī,''' fem., ‘a four-year-old ox or cow,’ is mentioned in the later Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1169> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 3, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 11;<br> 13, 17;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiv. 10;<br> xviii. 26, etc.</ref>

तुर्व
<u>'''Turva'''</u> occurs only once in the Rigveda (x. 62, 10), doubtless as a name of the '''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]]''' people or king. <br>==Foot Notes==

तुर्वश
<u>'''Turvaśa'''</u> occurs frequently in the Rigveda as the name of a man or of a people, usually in connexion with '''Yadu.''' The two words usually occur in the singular without any connecting particle, ''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] Yadu'' or ''Yadu [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]].''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1171> v. 31, 8.</ref> In a plural form the name [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] occurs once with the Yadus,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1171> i. 108, 8.</ref> and once alone<ref name=fx4_ve1_1171> viii. 4, 18;<br> singular with [[आनव|Ānava]] in viii. 4, 1.</ref> in a hymn in which the singular has already been used. In one passage<ref name=fx5_ve1_1171> iv. 30, 17.</ref> the dual ''Turvaśā-Yadū'' actually occurs, and in another<ref name=fx6_ve1_1171> x. 62, 10. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 166;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 220, n. 1.</ref> ''Yadus Turvaś ca,'' ‘Yadu and [[तुर्व|Turva]].’ In other passages<ref name=fx7_ve1_1171> i. 4, 77;<br> vi. 27, 7. ''Cf.'' viii. 4, 1.</ref> [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] appears alone, while in one<ref name=fx8_ve1_1171> vii. 19, 8.</ref> [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] and [[याद्व|Yādva]] occur.<br><br>From these facts Hopkins<ref name=fx9_ve1_1171> ''Op. cit.,'' 258 ''et seq.''</ref> deduces the erroneousness of the ordinary view,<ref name=fx10_ve1_1171> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 122, 124;<br> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 404;<br> Ludwig, ''op. cit.,'' 153;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 64;<br> ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 153 ''et seq.,'' etc.</ref> according to which [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] is the name of a tribe, the singular denoting the king, and regards [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] as the name of the Yadu king. But the evidence for this is not conclusive. Without laying any stress on the argument based on the theory<ref name=fx11_ve1_1171> Zimmer, 122, 124;<br> Macdonell, 153, 154.</ref> that the ‘five peoples’ of the Rigveda are the '''Anus, Druhyus,''' Turvaśas, Yadus, and '''Pūrus,''' it is perfectly reasonable to hold that the Turvaśas and Yadus were two distinct though closely allied tribes. Such they evidently were to the seers of the hymns which mention in the dual the ''Turvaśā-Yadū'' and speak of ''Yadus Turvaś ca.'' This explanation also suits best the use of the plural of [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] in two Rigvedic hymns.<br><br>In the Rigveda the chief exploit of [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] was his participation in the war against '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]],''' by whom he was defeated.<ref name=fx12_ve1_1171> vii. 18, 6.</ref> Hopkins<ref name=fx13_ve1_1171> ''Op. cit.,'' 264.</ref> suggests that he may have been named [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] because of his fleet (''tura'') escape from the battle. His escape(**  1 i. 36, 18; 54, 6; 174, 9; vi. 20, 12; 45, 1; viii. 4, 7; 7, 18; 9, 14; 45, 27; x. 49, 8. In vii. 18, 6, [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] is joined with [[यक्षु|Yakṣu]], apparently a contemptuous variant of Yadu (Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 261). ''Cf.'' '''[[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]].'''  may have been assisted by Indra, for in some passages<ref name=fx14_ve1_1171> Rv. i. 174, 9;<br> iv. 30, 17;<br> v. 31, 8;<br> viii. 4, 7.</ref> Indra's aid to [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] (and) Yadu is referred to; it is also significant that the Anu, and apparently the [[द्रुह्यु|Druhyu]], kings are mentioned as having been drowned in the defeat, but not the [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] and Yadu kings, and that [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] appears in the eighth book of the Rigveda as a worshipper of Indra with the Anu prince, the successor, presumably, of the one who was drowned.<ref name=fx15_ve1_1171> Hopkins, 265.</ref> Griffith,<ref name=fx16_ve1_1171> ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 433, n.</ref> however, proposes to refer these passages to a defeat by [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] and Yadu of Arṇa and [[चित्ररथ|Citraratha]] on the '''[[सरयु|Sarayu]];'''<ref name=fx17_ve1_1171> The hymn is a late one, and the connexion of verse 18, where Arṇa and [[चित्ररथ|Citraratha]] are mentioned, is obscure. ''Cf.'' Hopkins. 259.</ref> but the evidence for this is quite inadequate.<br><br>Two passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx18_ve1_1171> vi. 45, 1;<br> ix. 61, 2 (where Divodāsa is mentioned);<br> vii. 19, 8 (where he appears as [[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]]).</ref> seem to refer to an attack by [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] and Yadu on '''Divodāsa,''' the father of [[सुदास्|Sudās]]. It is reasonable to suppose that this was an attack of the two peoples on Divodāsa, for there is some improbability of the references being to the [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]], who was concerned in the attack on [[सुदास्|Sudās]], the son.<br><br>Zimmer<ref name=fx19_ve1_1171> ''Op. cit.,'' 124.</ref> considers that the Turvaśas were also called '''Vṛcīvants.''' This view is based on a hymn<ref name=fx20_ve1_1171> vi. 27, 5-7.</ref> in which reference is made to the defeat of the Vṛcīvants on the '''[[यव्यावती|Yavyāvatī]]''' and '''[[हरियूपीया|Hariyūpīyā]]''' in aid of Daivarāta, and of [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] in aid of '''[[सृञ्जय|Sṛñjaya]],''' the latter being elsewhere<ref name=fx21_ve1_1171> iv. 15, 4.</ref> clearly the son of [[देवरात|Devarāta]]. But as this evidence for the identification of the Turvaśas with the Vṛcīvants is not clear, it seems sufficient<ref name=fx22_ve1_1171> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 404, n. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 105.</ref> to assume that they were allies.<br><br>Later, in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx23_ve1_1171> xiii. 5, 4, 16.</ref> the Turvaśas appear as allies of the Pañcālas, [[तौर्वश|Taurvaśa]] horses, thirty-three in number, and armed men, to the number of 6,000, being mentioned.<ref name=fx24_ve1_1171> The sense is obscure. The St. Petersburg Dictionary takes it apparently as 6,033 horses (of armed warriors);<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 400, prefers to understand it as 33 horses and 6,000 men;<br> Oldenberg, ''loc. cit.,'' takes it as 6,033 warriors. Harisvāmin's Commentary, cited by Eggeling, is obscure.</ref> But otherwise the name disappears: this lends  probability to Oldenberge's conjecture<ref name=fx25_ve1_1171> ''Buddha,'' 404.</ref> that the Turvaśas became merged in the '''[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]]''' people. Hopkins<ref name=fx26_ve1_1171> ''Op. cit.,'' 258, n. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 220.</ref> considers that in the Śatapatha passage the horses were merely named from the family of [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]]; but this view is less likely, since it ignores the difficulty involved in the reference to the men.<br><br>It is impossible to be certain regarding the home of the Turvaśas at the time of their conflict with [[सुदास्|Sudās]]. They apparently crossed the '''[[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]],'''<ref name=fx27_ve1_1171> Rv. vii. 18.</ref> but from which side is disputed. The view of Pischel<ref name=fx28_ve1_1171> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 218, ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 126.</ref> and Geldner,<ref name=fx29_ve1_1171> ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 152. If in Rv. viii. 20, 24, 1 ''rvaśa'' is read with Ludwig for ''tūrvath'' hey are connected with the '''[[सिन्धु|Sindhu]].'''<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 167;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Text,'' 5, 286;<br> Bergaigne, ''Religion Védique,'' 2, 354 ''et seq.''</ref> that they advanced from the west towards the east, where the '''Bharatas''' were (see '''Kuru'''), is the more probable.

तुर्वीति
<u>'''Turvīti'''</u> is mentioned several times in the Rigveda, both in association with [[वय्य|Vayya]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1172> i. 54, 6;<br> ii. 13, 12;<br> iv. 19, 6.</ref> and alone.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1172> Rv. i. 36, 18;<br> 61, 11;<br> 112, 23.</ref> In three passages<ref name=fx3_ve1_1172> i. 61, 11;<br> ii. 13, 12;<br> iv. 19, 6.</ref> reference is made to Indra aiding him over a flood. Ludwig<ref name=fx4_ve1_1172> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 147;<br> 4, 254. ''Cf.'' '''Turvas1a,''' and Bergaigne, ''Religion Védique,'' 2, 358;<br> Oldenberg, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 42, 36.</ref> has conjectured that he was king of the Turvaśas and Yadus. But there is no sufficient evidence for this view, though presumably he was of the [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] tribe.

तुला
<u>'''Tulā,'''</u> ‘scales,’ is mentioned in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1173> xxx. 17.</ref> The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1173> xi. 2, 7, 33.</ref> also speaks of the balance in connexion with the weighing of a man's good and evil deeds in the next and in this world. This differs very considerably from the later balance<ref name=fx3_ve1_1173> Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 145.</ref> ordeal, in which a man was weighed twice, and was pronounced guilty or innocent according as, on the second occasion, he was more or less heavy than on the  first. It is not possible to read the later practice into the earlier.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1173> Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 21;<br> 2, 363, quotes Schlagintweit as giving this passage as an example of the balance ordeal. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 45, n. 4.</ref>

तुष
<u>'''Tuṣa,'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1174> ix. 6, 16;<br> xi. 1, 12, 29;<br> 3, 5;<br> xii. 3, 19.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1174> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 5, 5;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 9, etc.</ref> regularly denotes the ‘husk’ of grain, often used for a fire.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1174> ''[[तुष|Tuṣa]]-[[पक्व|pakva]],'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 4, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 2, 1, 7.</ref>

तूणव
<u>'''Tūṇava'''</u> denotes in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_1175> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Samhitā, vi. 1, 4, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 6, 8;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiii. 4;<br> xxxiv. 5 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 477).</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve1_1175> Pañcavimśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 5, 13;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 13, 1;<br> 15, 1;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], xiii. 9.</ref> a musical instrument of wood, probably the ‘flute.’ A ‘fluteblower’ is enumerated among the victims of the Puruṣamedha, or ‘human sacrifice.’<ref name=fx3_ve1_1175> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 19, 20;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 289.</ref>

तूतुजि
<u>'''Tūtuji.'''</u> See '''Tuji.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

तूपर
<u>'''Tūpara,'''</u> ‘hornless,’ is a frequent description of animals intended for the sacrifice, especially of the goat, in the Atharvaveda and later.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1177> Av. xi. 9, 22;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 1, 4, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 1, 15;<br> xxix. 59, etc.;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, 3, 7, etc.</ref>

तूर्घ्न
<u>'''Tūrghna'''</u> is mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyak (v. 1) as the northern part of [[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1178> ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 78.</ref> Its exact position, however, cannot be ascertained.

तूर्णाश
<u>'''Tūrṇāśa,'''</u> in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1179> viii. 32, 4. ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 16.</ref> seems to denote a ‘mountain torrent.’ 

तूर्वयाण
<u>'''Tūrvayāṇa'''</u> is the name of a prince mentioned in the Rigveda. He appears by name in two passages,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1180> i. 53, 10;<br> vi. 18, 13.</ref> and is clearly alluded to in a third,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1180> ii. 14, 7 (as a comparison of the two preceding passages shows);<br> perhaps also viii. 53, 2. In i. 174, 3, [[तूर्वयाण|Tūrvayāṇa]] seems also to be a proper name, though Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' here regards the word as an adjective.</ref> as an enemy of '''[[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]], [[आयु|Āyu]],''' and '''[[कुत्स|Kutsa]].''' With this accords the fact that the '''Pakthas''' were opposed in the battle of the ten kings to the Tṛtsus,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1180> vii. 18.</ref> and that [[तूर्वयाण|Tūrvayāṇa]]  is shown by another passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_1180> x. 61, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 71-77.</ref> to have been a prince of the Pakthas. He is there represented as having been a protégé of Indra, who aided him against '''Cyavāna''' and his guardians, the Maruts. It is not probable that he is identical with '''[[सुश्रवस्|Suśravas]].'''<ref name=fx5_ve1_1180> Mentioned in i. 53, 9. 10. ''Cf.'' Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 75, n.</ref>

तूष
<u>'''Tūṣa'''</u> is found in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve1_1181> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 1, 1;<br> ii. 4, 9, 1;<br> vi. 1, 1, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiii. 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 1, 8;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 1, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 262.</ref> denoting the ‘fringe’ or ‘trimming’ of a garment.

तृक्षि
<u>'''Tṛkṣi'''</u> is, in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1182> viii. 22, 7.</ref> the name of a prince who was a [[त्रासदस्यव|Trāsadasyava]], ‘descendant of '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]].'''’ He also appears with the [[द्रुह्यु|Druhyu]] and the [[पूरु|Pūru]] peoples in another hymn.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1182> vi. 46, 8. It is not certain that the two persons are identical (''cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologic,'' 1, 113, notes 3, 4), but it is probable.</ref> It has been conjectured, but it is not probable, that the steed '''[[तार्क्ष्य|Tārkṣya]]''' (as ‘belonging to Tṛkṣi’) was his.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1182> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 149.</ref>

तृण
<u>'''Tṛṇa,'''</u> ‘grass,’ is often mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1183> i. 161, 1;<br> 162, 8, 11;<br> x. 102, 10, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1183> Av. ii. 30, 1;<br> vi. 54, 1, etc.;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 22;<br> viii. 24, etc.</ref> It was used as straw to roof in a house or hut.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1183> Av. iii. 12, 5;<br> ix. 3, 4, 7.</ref> 

तृण-जलायुक
<u>'''Tṛṇa-jalāyuka,'''</u> ‘caterpillar,’ is mentioned in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iv. 2, 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

तृण-स्कन्द
<u>'''Tṛṇa-skanda'''</u> occurs once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1185> i. 172, 3.</ref> as the name of a prince, his subjects (''viśaḥ'') being referred to.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1185> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 159, takes ''viśaḥ'' as ‘cantons,’ but see [[विश्|Viś]].</ref> The word may originally have meant ‘grasshopper.’<ref name=fx3_ve1_1185> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref>

तृतीयक
<u>'''Tṛtīyaka,'''</u> ‘the tertian (fever),’ is mentioned in the Atharvaveda (i. 25, 4; v. 22, 13; xix. 39, 10). See '''[[तक्मन्|Takman]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

तृत्सु
<u>'''Tṛtsu'''</u> occurs in the Rigveda, once in the singular<ref name=fx1_ve1_1187> vii. 18, 13.</ref> and several times in the plural,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1187> vii. 18, 7. 15. 19;<br> 33, 5. 6;<br> 83, 4. 6. 8.</ref> as a proper name. The Tṛtsus were clearly helpers of '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]]''' in the great battle against the ten kings, '''[[शिम्यु|Śimyu]],''' the '''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]],''' the '''[[द्रुह्यु|Druhyu]], [[कवष|Kavaṣa]],''' the '''[[पूरु|Pūru]],''' the '''Anu, [[भेद|Bheda]], [[शम्बर|Śambara]],''' the two '''Vaikarṇas,''' and perhaps the '''Yadu,''' who led with them as allies<ref name=fx3_ve1_1187> They were regarded as enemies of the kings by Roth, ''Zur Litteratur und Geschichte des Weda,'' 95, and by Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 126, The latter, however, altered his view (see pp. 430, 431, which Hopkins, ''op. cit.,'' 260, has overlooked), and there is no doubt that the later opinion is correct. ''Cf.'' also Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 173;<br> Hopkins, 260, 261. Of these tribes the Pakthas, Alinas, [[भलानस्|Bhalānas]], Viṣāṇins, and Śivas, were probably settled in the north-west, to the west of the Indus, and around the Kabul River. The Anus, Pūrus, Turvaśas, Yadus, and Druhyus, were probably tribes of the Panjab;<br> the Ajas, Śigrus, and Yakṣus, tribes of the east, under [[भेद|Bheda]];<br> [[शम्बर|Śambara]] may also have been a native of the east;<br> [[शिम्यु|Śimyu]] and [[कवष|Kavaṣa]] are doubtful;<br> and the Vaikarṇau probably belonged to the north-west.</ref> the '''Matsyas, Pakthas, [[भलानस्|Bhalānas]], Alinas, Viṣāṇins, Śivas, Ajas, Śigrus,''' and perhaps Yakṣus.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1187> This is uncertain;<br> the text of the Rigveda, vii. 18, 6, has [[यक्षु|Yakṣu]], and the same word recurs in verse 19. On the other hand, the word Yadu would naturally be expected in verse 6, as [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] is mentioned. Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 122, says that Yadu occurs in vii. 18, but on p. 126 he cites [[यक्षु|Yakṣu]] in both places, evidently by oversight. Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 261, n., considers that [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]], the [[यक्षु|Yakṣu]], is a sarcastic expression, instead of [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]], the Yadu, making [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]], whom he regards as king of the Yadus, ridiculous as a member of an insignificant people, and alluding to him also as a sacrificial victim (as it were, ''yaṣṭavya,'' ‘to be offered’;<br> ''of [[पुरोडाश्|puroḍāś]],'' ‘cake of sacrifice,’ in verse 6, as a pun on ''purogās,'' ‘leader’). Whether [[यक्षु|Yakṣu]] is used contemptuously for Yadu or not, it seems hard not to believe that the Yadus are referred to.</ref> The defeat of the ten kings is celebrated in one  hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1187> vii. 18.</ref> and is evidently alluded to in two others.<ref name=fx6_ve1_1187> vii. 33 and 83.</ref> The great battle took place on the '''[[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]],''' but there was also a fight on the '''[[यमुना|Yamunā]]''' with [[भेद|Bheda]], the Ajas, Śigrus, and Yakṣus. As the [[यमुना|Yamunā]] and the Parusṇī represent opposite ends of the territory of the Tṛtsus (for we cannot with Hopkins<ref name=fx7_ve1_1187> ''India, Old and New,'' 52. No such conjecture was made by him in the ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 259 ''et seq.''</ref> safely identify the streams), it is difficult to see exactly how the ten kings could be confederated, but it should be noted that the references to the ten kings occur in the two later hymns,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1187/> and not in the hymn<ref name=fx5_ve1_1187/> describing the battle itself; besides, absolute numerical accuracy cannot be insisted upon.<br><br>It is difficult exactly to determine the character of the Tṛtsus; especially in their relation to the Bharatas, who under Viśvāmitra's guidance are represented as prospering and as advancing to the '''[[विपाश्|Vipāś]]''' and '''[[शुतुद्री|Śutudrī]].'''<ref name=fx8_ve1_1187> Rv. iii. 33;<br> 53, 9-12.</ref> Roth ingeniously brought this into connexion with the defeat of his enemies by [[सुदास्|Sudās]], which is celebrated in the seventh book of the Rigveda--a book attributed to the [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] family--and thought that there was a reference in one verse<ref name=fx9_ve1_1187> vii. 33, 6. See Roth, ''op. cit.,'' 90, 121: Muir. ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 320;<br> Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 154, 155;<br> von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur and Cultur,'' 35, 36;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 110, 111;<br> Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society.'' 16, 41.</ref> to the defeat of the Bharatas by [[सुदास्|Sudās]]. But it seems certain that the verse is mistranslated, and that the Bharatas are really represented as victors with [[सुदास्|Sudās]].<ref name=fx10_ve1_1187> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 406: Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 34.</ref> Ludwig<ref name=fx11_ve1_1187> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 175.</ref> accordingly identifies the Tṛtsus and the Bharatas. Oldenberg,<ref name=fx12_ve1_1187> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 207. ''Cf.'' Bergaigne, ''Religion Védique,'' 2, 362.</ref> after accepting this view at first,<ref name=fx13_ve1_1187> ''Buddha,'' 405, 406.</ref> later expressed the opinion that the Tṛtsus were the priests of the [[भरत|Bharata]] people, and therefore identical with the Vasiṣṭhas. This view is supported by the fact that in one passage<ref name=fx14_ve1_1187> Rv. vii. 33, 1 (''śvityañco dakṣiṇataskaparainaḥ'').</ref> the Tṛtsus are clearly described as wearing their hair in the peculiar manner affected by the Vasiṣṭhas,<ref name=fx15_ve1_1187> Rv. vii. 83. (''śvityañco dakṣiṇataskaparainaḥ'').</ref> and would in that passage thus seem to represent the Vasiṣṭhas.  But Geldner<ref name=fx16_ve1_1187> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 136;<br> ''ṚgvedaGlossar,'' 74.</ref> has suggested with great probability that [[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]], who is once mentioned in the singular,<ref name=fx17_ve1_1187> Rv. vii. 18, 13.</ref> means the [[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]] king--that is, [[सुदास्|Sudās]].<ref name=fx18_ve1_1187> ''Cf.'' Rv. vii. 18, 24. The parallelism of verses 13 and 24 is quite beyond question. Moreover, the praise of [[सुदास्|Sudās]] and of the Bharatas is found coupled in Rv. iii. 53, 9. 12. 24, and in Rv. vi. 16, 4, 5, Divodāsa is coupled with the Bharatas in such a way as to suggest irresistibly that Divodāsa was a [[भरत|Bharata]].</ref> This explanation alone justifies the description<ref name=fx19_ve1_1187> Rv. vii. 33, 6.</ref> of the Bharatas as ''Tṛtsūnāṃ viśaḥ,''<ref name=fx20_ve1_1187> That this is the sense of ''viśaḥ'' is almost certain. See Geldner, ''Vedische Studien, loc. cit.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 159, and Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 111, render it ‘cantons,’ but see Vīś.</ref> ‘subjects of the Tṛtsus,’ meaning the [[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]] [[गोत्र|Gotra]] or family, for the people could not be said to be subjects of a body of priests. The Vasiṣṭhas might be called Tṛtsus because of their close connexion with the royal house of that people. The reverse process is also quite possible, but is rendered improbable by the fact that the '''Pratṛdaḥ''' are referred to as receiving [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]].<ref name=fx21_ve1_1187> Rv. vii. 33, 14. Geldner (''op. cit.,'' 138, 139) ingeniously suggests that [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]], being miraculously born, needed a [[गोत्र|Gotra]], and so became a [[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]].</ref> This name of the [[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]] dynasty is probably older than its connexion with [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] in the time of [[सुदास्|Sudās]], a conclusion supported by the name of '''[[प्रतर्दन|Pratardana]],''' who is mentioned later as a descendant of Divodāsa,<ref name=fx22_ve1_1187> [[प्रतर्दन|Pratardana]] is mentioned in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxvi. 5, as [[दैवोदासि|Daivodāsi]], ‘descendant of Divodāsa.’</ref> an ancestor of [[सुदास्|Sudās]]. The [[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]] dynasty could therefore hardly have been referred to as Vasiṣṭhas. For the further history of the dynasty and its relation with [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] and [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]], see '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]].'''<br><br>If the Tṛtsus and their subjects, the Bharatas, were in the Rigvedic period at war with the tribes on either side of the territory between the [[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]] and the [[यमुना|Yamunā]], it is clear<ref name=fx23_ve1_1187> ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 406 ''et seq.,'' and see '''Kuru.'''</ref> that later on they coalesced with the Pūrus and probably others of those tribes to form the '''Kuru''' people. Already in the Rigveda<ref name=fx24_ve1_1187> See Rv. vi. 47, where Divodāsa and [[सार्ञ्जय|Sārñjaya]] are both praised. In vi. 27, 5, the Turvaśas are opposed to the Sṛñjayas, and in vii. 18, 6;<br> 19, 8, the Tṛtsus are opposed to the Turvaśas.</ref> the Tṛtsus are allied with the '''Sṛñjayas,''' and in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx25_ve1_1187> ii. 4, 4, 5.</ref> one [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] serves both Kurus and Sṛñjayas. <br><br>Hillebrandt<ref name=fx26_ve1_1187> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 98 ''et seq.''</ref> considers that the Tṛtsus cannot be identified with the Bharatas, but that [[सुदास्|Sudās]] and the Bharatas represent an invading body, which, however, became allied with the Tṛtsus and the [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] priests. He also thinks that the Rigveda reveals a time when '''Divodāsa,''' the grandfather or ancestor of [[सुदास्|Sudās]], was living in Arachosia, on the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]],''' and warring against the '''Paṇis,''' whom he identifies with the Parnians. But this conjecture<ref name=fx27_ve1_1187> ''Cf.'' also Grierson, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 837 ''et seq.''</ref> cannot be regarded as probable. In the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]<ref name=fx28_ve1_1187> Rv. vi. 61, 3. Brunnhofer, ''Iran und Turan,'' 127, identifies this river with the Oxus, but Hillebrandt identifies it with the Haraqaiti.</ref> it is not necessary to see any other river than the later [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]], in the middle country, which flowed within the boundaries of the Tṛtsus: it is also significant that there are references<ref name=fx29_ve1_1187> Rv. ix. 61, 2. ''Cf.'' vi. 45, 1;<br> Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 124.<br><br>''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 424.</ref> to contests between '''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] Yadu''' and [[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]] or Divodāsa. Thus there is no reason to doubt that Divodāsa and the Bharatas were in the middle country, and not in Iran.

तृष्ट
<u>'''Tṛṣṭa'''</u> is mentioned in the Maitrāyaṇī<ref name=fx1_ve1_1188> iv. 8, 1. The reading is uncertain;<br> it may be ''Tṛṣṭhā-varutrī.'' See von Schroeder's edition, p. 106, n.</ref> and [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx2_ve1_1188> xxx. 1, where again the reading is uncertain. The Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitā, xlvi. 4, has ''Tvaṣṭā-varutrī'' (von Schroeder's edition of the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]], 2, 181, n.).<br><br>''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 190, 191;<br> Lévi, ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 119.</ref> as being along with '''Varutri''' the priest of the Asuras.

तृष्टामा
<u>'''Tṛṣṭāmā'''</u> is mentioned as a stream in the [[नदी|Nadī]]-[[स्तुति|stuti]], or ‘praise of rivers,’ in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1189> x. 75, 6. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 14.</ref> There seems to be no means of identifying it.

तेजन
<u>'''Tejana'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1190> i. 110, 5.</ref> a rod or staff of reed used for measuring a field. In the Atharvaveda the sense of ‘bamboo’ is found twice,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1190> i. 2, 4;<br> xx. 136, 3 (= [[खिल|Khila]], v. 22, 3). ''Cf. taijana'' as an adjective in [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxi. 10.</ref> the bamboo being specified in the  second passage as ‘of the spring’ (''vāsantika''); more particularly it denotes the shaft of an arrow,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1190> Av. vi. 49, 1 (Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 317);<br> ''[[इषु|iṣu]] eka-tejanā,'' ‘an arrow with one shaft,’ vi. 57, 1.</ref> a sense often found in later Vedic texts.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1190> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 25;<br> iii. 26;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxv. 1 (with ''[[शृङ्ग|śṛṅga]]'' and ''[[शल्य|śalya]]'' as the three parts of an arrow;<br> in Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 8, 1, ''[[कुल्मल|kulmala]]'' takes the place of ''[[तेजन|tejana]];<br> cf. ibid.,'' 2). The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 3, 3, 1, has ''anīka, [[शल्य|śalya]],'' and ''[[तेजन|tejana]]. Cf.'' '''[[इषु|Iṣu]].'''</ref>

तेजनी
<u>'''Tejanī'''</u> denotes in the later Saṃhitās and Brāhmaṇas a bundle of reeds,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1191> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 8, 3, 12;<br> perhaps [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiii. 9.</ref> and in some cases such a bundle twisted into a rope,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1191> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxii. 13;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 11, as rendered by Sāyaṇa.</ref> for the two ends of the [[तेजनी|Tejanī]] are mentioned.

तेजस्
<u>'''Tejas'''</u> is regarded by Schrader<ref name=fx1_ve1_1192> ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 221.</ref> as having in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1192> ''Cf.'' vi. 3, 5;<br> 8, 5;<br> 15, 19.</ref> the specific sense of ‘axe.’ But in all the passages the sense of the ‘bolt’ of the god is adequate.

तैत्तिरीय
<u>'''Taittirīya'''</u> is the name of one of the divisions of the Black [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]], which is, however, not found thus described until the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] period.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1193> Anupada [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 6;<br> vii. 7. 10, etc. See Weber ''Indian Literature,'' 87 ''et seq.;<br>'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 175 ''et seq.;<br>'' von Schroeder, Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, 1, x ''et seq.''</ref> The school is represented by a Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1193> Edited by Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' xi, xii, and in the ''Bibliotheca Indica,'' 1854-1899.</ref> a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_1193> Edited in the ''Bibliotheca Indica,'' 1855-1870, and in the Ānandāśrama Series, 1898.</ref> and an Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1193> Edited in the ''Bibliotheca Indica,'' 18641872, and in the Ānandāśrama Series, 1898.</ref> besides an [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx5_ve1_1193> Edited by Roer, 1850, and in the Ānandāśrama Series, 1889.</ref> which forms a part of the Āraṇyaka.

तैमात
<u>'''Taimāta'''</u> is twice mentioned as a species of snake in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1194> v. 13, 6;<br> 18, 4. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 243;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 425;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 95.</ref> 

तैल
<u>'''Taila,'''</u> ‘sesamum oil,’ is mentioned in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1195> i. 7, 2 (all the manuscripts have ''[[तौल|taula]],'' which must be wrong;<br> the Paippalāda MS has ''tūla:'' see Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 7).</ref> where<ref name=fx2_ve1_1195> xx. 136, 16.</ref> reference is made to keeping such oil in jars. In the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1195> xi. 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben.'' 240, 241.</ref> reference is made to anointing with sesamum oil.

तोक
<u>'''Toka'''</u> denotes ‘children’ or ‘descendants’ generally in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1196> i. 43, 2;<br> ii. 2, 11;<br> 9, 2;<br> vii. 62, 6;<br> viii. 5, 20;<br> 67, 11, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1196> Av. i. 13, 2;<br> 28, 3;<br> v. 19, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvi. 7 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 466);<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 5, 2, 39, etc.</ref> The word is often joined with '''[[तनय|Tanaya]].'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1196> Rv. i. 31, 12;<br> 64, 14;<br> 114, 6;<br> 147, 1;<br> ii. 33, 14;<br> v. 53, 13;<br> vi. 1, 12, etc.;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7.</ref>

तोक्मन्
<u>'''Tokman,'''</u> neut., denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1197> x. 62, 8.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1197> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 13, 81;<br> xxi. 30. 42;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 11;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 5, etc.</ref> the green shoots of any kind of grain. In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1197> viii. 16. ''Cf.'' for its use at the [[सौत्रामणी|Sautrāmaṇī]], Hillebrandt, ''Rituallitteratur,'' 160.</ref> reference is made to the shoots of rice (''[[व्रीहि|vrīhi]]''), large rice (''mahāvrīhi''), panic seed (''[[प्रियङ्गु|priyaṅgu]]''), and barley (''yava'').

तोत्त्र
<u>'''Tottra,'''</u> a ‘goad’ for driving cattle, is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xii. 4, 1, 10).<br>==Foot Notes==

तोद
<u>'''Toda'''</u> appears once to denote a ‘goad’ in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1199> iv. 16, 11;<br> [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] in [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 107.</ref> but more often<ref name=fx2_ve1_1199> Rv. vi. 6, 6;<br> 12, 1, 3, are probably so to be understood.</ref> it is an agent noun meaning ‘impeller.’ Geldner<ref name=fx3_ve1_1199> ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 74.</ref> considers that in one passage<ref name=fx4_ve1_1199> Rv. i. 150, 1.</ref> the sense is ‘wielder of the rod of punishment’ (later ''[[दण्ड|daṇḍa]]-dhara'')--that is, ‘prince.’ 

तौग्र्य
<u>'''Taugrya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[तुग्र|Tugra]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''[[भुज्यु|Bhujyu]]''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1200> i. 117, 16;<br> 118, 6;<br> 182, 5. 6;<br> viii. 5, 22;<br> x. 39, 4.</ref>

तौदी
<u>'''Taudī'''</u> in one passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1201> x. 4, 24. ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 578, leaves the word untranslated. Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 608, suggests that it is a fanciful name, ‘the piercer,’ since it is associated with ''ghṛtācī,'' ‘dripping with ghee,’ which is clearly such a word.</ref> appears to denote a plant.

तौर्वश
<u>'''Taurvaśa.'''</u> See '''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

तौल
<u>'''Taula,'''</u> the reading of the text of the Atharvaveda (i. 7, 2), and a form which is otherwise unknown and cannot be satisfactorily explained, must doubtless be meant for '''[[तैल|Taila]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

तौविलिका
<u>'''Tauvilikā,'''</u> occurring once in a hymn of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1204> vi. 16, 3.</ref> is a word of quite uncertain sense. Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_1204> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> thinks it means some kind of beast; Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve1_1204> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 72.</ref> and Whitney<ref name=fx4_ve1_1204> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 292.</ref> regard it as a sort of plant; Sāyaṇa explains it as a disease-causing demon, while Bloomfield<ref name=fx5_ve1_1204> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 30, 466.</ref> leaves the sense doubtful.

त्रपु
<u>'''Trapu'''</u> denotes ‘tin’ in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1205> xi. 3, 8.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1205> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xviii. 10;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 11, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 13 (all in enumerations of metals);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 12, 6, 5;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 17, 3;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 17, 7. In [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 7, 5, 1, the form is ''trapus.''</ref> Its quality of being easily smelted, which Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_1205> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 53.</ref> thinks is indicated by the name (as derived from the root ''trap,'' ‘be ashamed’), is clearly alluded to in the Atharvaveda passage. 

त्रस-दस्यु
<u>'''Trasa-dasyu,'''</u> son of '''[[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]],'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_1206> Rv. v. 33, 8;<br> vii. 19, 3;<br> viii. 19, 36;<br> iv. 42, 8 ''et seq.''</ref> is mentioned in the Rigveda as king of the Pūrus.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1206> Rv. iv. 38, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' vii. 19, 3. He is merely alluded to in i. 63, 7;<br> 112, 4;<br> viii. 8, 21;<br> 36, 7;<br> 37, 7;<br> 49, 10.</ref> He was born to [[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]] by his wife, '''[[पुरुकुत्सानी|Purukutsānī]],''' at a time of great distress;<ref name=fx3_ve1_1206> Rv. iv. 42, 8 ''et seq.''</ref> this, according to Sāyaṇa, refers to Purukutsa's captivity: possibly his death is really meant. [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]] was also a descendant of Girikṣit,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1206> Rv. v. 33, 8.</ref> and [[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]] was a descendant of [[दुर्गह|Durgaha]]. The genealogy, therefore, appears to be: [[दुर्गह|Durgaha]], Girikṣit, [[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]], [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]]. [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]] was the ancestor of '''[[तृक्षि|Tṛkṣi]],'''<ref name=fx5_ve1_1206> Rv. viii. 22, 7. He was a [[पूरु|Pūru]] king. See vi. 46, 8.</ref> and, according to Ludwig,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1206> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 155, with reference to Rv. v. 33, 7 ''et seq.''</ref> had a son [[हिरणिन्|Hiraṇin]]. Trasadasyu's chronological position is determined by the fact that his father, [[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]], was a contemporary of [[सुदास्|Sudās]], either as an opponent<ref name=fx7_ve1_1206> So Ludwig, 3, 174, who alters ''Sudāsam'' to ''Sudāse,'' in support of this view, in Rv. i. 63, 7. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 204, 205, 219, ''ṚgvedaNoten,'' 1, 63;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 153;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 112, n. 1. Foy, Kuhn's ''Zeitschrift,'' 34, 242, denies that the word in this passage is a proper name at all.</ref> or as a friend.<ref name=fx8_ve1_1206> ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''loc. cit.''</ref> That [[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]] was an enemy of [[सुदास्|Sudās]] is more probable, because the latter's predecessor, Divodāsa, was apparently<ref name=fx9_ve1_1206> Rv. i. 130, 7;<br> Ludwig, 3, 114;<br> but see Hillebrandt, 1, 113, 114.</ref> at enmity with the Pūrus, and in the battle of the ten kings Pūrus were ranged against [[सुदास्|Sudās]] and the Tṛtsus. [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]] himself seems to have been an energetic king. His people, the Pūrus, were settled on the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]],'''<ref name=fx10_ve1_1206> Rv. vii. 95, 96;<br> Ludwig, 3, 175;<br> Hillebrandt, 1, 115.</ref> which was, no doubt, the stream in the middle country, that locality according well with the later union of the Pūrus with the '''Kuru''' people, who inhabited that country. This union is exemplified in the person of '''Kuruśravaṇa,''' who is called [[त्रासदस्यव|Trāsadasyava]], ‘descendant of [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]],’ in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx11_ve1_1206> x. 33, 4. ''Cf.'' Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 386 ''et seq.;<br>'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 150, 184.</ref> whose father was '''[[मित्रातिथि|Mitrātithi]],''' and whose son was '''[[उपमश्रवस्|Upamaśravas]].''' The relation of [[मित्रातिथि|Mitrātithi]] to [[तृक्षि|Tṛkṣi]] does not appear.<br><br>Another descendant of [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]] was '''Tryaruṇa [[त्रैवृष्ण|Traivṛṣṇa]],''' who is simply called [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]] in a hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx12_ve1_1206> v. 27.</ref>  He was not only a ‘descendant of Trivṛṣan,’ but, according to the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx13_ve1_1206> xiii. 3, 12. The Tāṇḍaka, cited by Sāyaṇa (Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 67), has [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]], like the Rv.</ref> he was also [[त्रैधात्व|Traidhātva]], ‘descendant of Tridhātu.’ The order of these two predecessors of Tryaruṇa cannot be determined in any way from Vedic literature. According to the later tradition,<ref name=fx14_ve1_1206> Harivaṃśa, 714 ''et seq.,'' where the name (716) is also misread as Tridharman. [[त्रैधात्व|Traidhātva]] cannot reasonably be taken as representing a patronymic from Tridhanvan, as Sieg, ''op. cit.,'' 7476, seems to do. Trivṛṣan has entirely disappeared from the Epic tradition;<br> there is thus no way of assigning a relative priority to either Trivṛṣan or Tridhanvan.</ref> a prince named Tridhanvan preceded Tryaruṇa in the succession. Vedic tradition further fails to show in what precise relation [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]] stood to Trivṛṣan or Tryaruṇa.<br><br>Trasdasyu [[पौरुकुत्स|Paurukutsa]] appears in several Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx15_ve1_1206> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 16;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxii. 3 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 473);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 6, 5, 3.</ref> as a famous sacrificer of ancient times, together with '''[[पर आट्णार|Para Āṭṇāra]], [[वीतहव्य|Vītahavya]] [[श्रायस|Śrāyasa]],''' and '''[[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]] [[औशिज|Auśija]],''' who in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx16_ve1_1206> ii. 6, 11.<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 217 ''et seq.;<br>'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 111-116;<br> 2, 165, n. 4;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 25;<br> Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 386.</ref> are called ‘ancient great kings’ (''pūrve mahārājāḥ'').

त्रात ऐषुमत
<u>'''Trāta Aiṣumata'''</u> (‘descendant of Iṣumant’) is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1207> i. 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref> as a pupil of '''Nigaḍa [[पार्णवल्कि|Pārṇavalki]].'''

त्रायमाणा
<u>'''Trāyamāṇā'''</u> denotes in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1208> viii. 2, 6.</ref> a plant of an unknown species. The word is possibly only an epithet, retaining its participial sense of ‘preserving,’ though this interpretation is not favoured by the accent.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1208> ''[[त्रायमाणा|Trāyamāṇā]]. Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 477.</ref>

त्रासदस्यव
<u>'''Trāsadasyava,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]],'''’ is the patronymic in the Rigveda of '''[[तृक्षि|Tṛkṣi]]'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_1209> viii. 22, 7.</ref> and of '''Kuruśravaṇa.'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1209> x. 33, 4.</ref> The  word is also applied to Agni as ‘protector of, or worshipped by, Trasadasyu’ and his line.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1209> viii. 19, 32;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 96.</ref>

त्रि-ककुद्
<u>'''Tri-kakud'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_1210> Av. iv. 9, 8;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 3, 12.</ref> or '''Tri-kakubh,'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1210> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 6, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiii. 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xv. 4;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxii. 14.</ref> ‘having three peaks,’ occurs in the Atharvaveda and later as the name of a mountain in the Himālaya, the modern Trikota. From it came the salve ([[आञ्जन|Āñjana]]),<ref name=fx3_ve1_1210> Hence called ''[[त्रैककुद|Traikakuda]],'' Av. iv. 9, 9, 10;<br> xix. 44, 6, etc.</ref> which tradition made out to be derived from Vṛtra's eye.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1210> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Maitrāyaṇī and [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitās, ''loc. cit.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 198;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 5, 29, 30;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 239, n. 4;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 381.</ref>

त्रि-कद्रुक
<u>'''Tri-kadruka,'''</u> a term used in the plural only, appears to denote three vessels of some kind for holding Soma.<br><br>^1 i. 32, 3; ii. 11, 17; 15, 1; 22, 1; x. 14, 16.<br>==Foot Notes==

त्रि-खर्व
<u>'''Tri-kharva'''</u> is the name of a school of priests mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (ii. 8, 3) as practising a special rite with success.<br>==Foot Notes==

त्रित
<u>'''Trita'''</u> is clearly a god<ref name=fx1_ve1_1213> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 67-69.</ref> in Vedic literature, but [[यास्क|Yāska]] in one passage of the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1213> iv. 6.</ref> already explains the name as that of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] or seer.

त्रि-पुर
<u>'''Tri-pura,'''</u> ‘a threefold stronghold,’ is alluded to in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve1_1214> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 3, 3, 25;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 11;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] in ''Indische Studien,'' 2, 310. See also [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiv. 10, etc., and Lévi, ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 46, n 1.</ref> as a secure protection. But as the passages are mythical no stress can be laid on them as evidence for the existence of forts with three concentric walls. 

त्रि-प्लक्ष
<u>'''Tri-plakṣa,'''</u> masc. plur., ‘the three fig-trees,’ is the name of the place where the '''[[दृषद्वती|Dṛṣadvatī]]''' disappeared, near the '''[[यमुना|Yamunā]],''' according to the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1215> xxv. 13, 4. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 29, 33;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 19, 9;<br> Kātyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxiv. 6, 39.</ref>

त्रिय्-अवि
<u>'''Triy-avi.'''</u> See '''[[त्र्य्अवि|Tryavi]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

त्रि-युग
<u>'''Tri-yuga,'''</u> neut., is an expression occurring in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1217> x. 97, 1 = [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 6, 1, and Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā;<br> xii. 75.</ref> where it is said that the plants (''[[ओषधि|oṣadhi]]'') were born ‘three ages’ before the gods (''devebhyas triyugaṃ purā''). The commentator on the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1217> ix. 28.</ref> thinks that the ages here meant are the Yugas of the later Indian chronology, the sense of the passage being that the plants were born in the first Yuga. The author of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1217> vii. 2, 4, 26.<br><br>''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 340.</ref> understands three seasons--spring, the rains, and autumn--to be meant in the verse, taking the two words ''triyugaṃ purā'' separately as ‘formerly, in the three seasons.’ The vague sense ‘three ages’ is quite adequate: the use of ‘three’ in such cases is a favourite feature in folklore. ''Cf.'' '''Yuga.'''

त्रि-वत्स
<u>'''Tri-vatsa,'''</u> ‘three years old,’<ref name=fx1_ve1_1218> As regards the form and meaning of this compound, ''cf.'' '''[[त्र्य्अवि|Tryavi]].'''</ref> is an expression applied to cattle in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1218> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiv. 10;<br> xviii. 26;<br> xxviii. 27;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 13;<br> xviii. 9;<br> xxi. 14, etc. ''Cf.'' Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 3, 9 ''et seq.,'' where one explanation of the word is ''tri-[[वर्ष|varṣa]].''</ref>

त्रि-वृत्
<u>'''Tri-vṛt,'''</u> ‘threefold,’ is the designation of an amulet in the Atharvaveda (v. 28, 2. 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

त्रि-वेद कृष्ण-रात लौहित्य
<u>'''Tri-veda [[कृष्ण|Kṛṣṇa]]-rāta Lauhitya'''</u> (‘descendant of Lohita’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[श्यामजयन्त लौहित्य|Śyāmajayanta Lauhitya]],''' according to a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 42, 1). <br>==Foot Notes==

त्रि-शङ्कु
<u>'''Tri-śaṅku'''</u> is in Vedic literature the name of a sage mentioned as a teacher in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1221> i. 10, 1.</ref> There is no trace of the later legend by which he becomes the victim of '''Vasiṣṭha's''' curse and the object of '''Viśvāmitra's''' solicitude, being eventually fixed in the sky as a constellation.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1221> See Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 362, 375 ''et seq.''</ref> The confusion of the chronology in the tales of [[त्रिशङ्कु|Triśaṅku]] is a good example of the worthlessness of the supposed epic tradition.

त्रि-शोक
<u>'''Tri-śoka'''</u> is the name of an ancient mythical seer who is mentioned both in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1222> i. 112, 13;<br> viii. 45, 30. In x. 29, 2, the word seems merely to be an adjective, meaning ‘with triple splendour.’</ref> and the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1222> iv. 29, 6.</ref> A Sāman, or chant, named after him is referred to in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_1222> viii. 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 107, 162;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 33.</ref>

त्रै-ककुद
<u>'''Trai-kakuda.'''</u> See '''[[त्रिककुद्|Trikakud]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

त्रैतन
<u>'''Traitana'''</u> appears in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1224> i. 158, 5.</ref> as a '''[[दास|Dāsa]],''' an enemy of '''[[दीर्घतमस्|Dīrghatamas]],''' who seems to have engaged him in single combat and defeated him. The St. Petersburg Dictionary suggests that he is rather a supernatural being allied to [[त्रित|Trita]] (''cf.'' the Avestan Thrita and Thraetaona).<ref name=fx2_ve1_1224> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 68. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 151;<br> Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 144.</ref>

त्रै-धात्व
<u>'''Trai-dhātva'''</u> (‘descendant of Tridhātu,’) is the patronymic of '''Tryaruṇa''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 3, 12).<br>==Foot Notes==

त्रै-पद
<u>'''Trai-pada,'''</u> neut., occurs as a measure of distance, ‘threequarters’ of a '''[[योजन|Yojana]],''' in the Pañcāviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], where half a [[योजन|Yojana]] is termed '''[[गव्यूति|Gavyūti]]''' and a quarter '''[[क्रोश|Krośa]].'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_1226> xvi. 13. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiv. 41, 12.</ref> 

त्रैवणि
<u>'''Traivaṇi'''</u> is mentioned as a pupil of '''Aupacandhani''' or '''[[औपजन्धनि|Aupajandhani]]''' in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1227> ii. 6, 3 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]] = ii. 5, 21 Mādhyaṃdina);<br> iv. 6, 3 (= iv. 5, 27).</ref> In the Mādhyaṃdina recension<ref name=fx2_ve1_1227> iv. 5, 27.</ref> his name occurs twice in the second [[वंश|Vaṃśa]], in both cases as a pupil of [[औपजन्धनि|Aupajandhani]].

त्रै-वृष्ण
<u>'''Trai-vṛṣṇa,'''</u> ‘descendant of Trivṛṣan,’ is the patronymic of '''Trayaruṇa''' in the Rigveda (v. 27, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

त्र्य्-अरुण त्रै-वृष्ण त्रसदस्यु
<u>'''Try-aruṇa [[त्रै-वृष्ण|Trai-vṛṣṇa]] Trasadasyu'''</u> is the name of a prince whose generosity to a singer is celebrated in a hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1229> v. 27, 1-3.</ref> In the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1229> xiii. 3, 12. ''Cf.'' the Tāṇḍaka recension, cited in Sāyaṇa, on Rv. v. 2, where [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]] is given as the king's name.</ref> he appears as '''Tryaruṇa [[त्रैधात्व|Traidhātva]] [[ऐक्ष्वाक|Aikṣvāka]],''' and is the hero of the following story. He was out in his chariot with his [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], or domestic priest, '''[[वृश जान|Vṛśa Jāna]],''' and by excessive speed in driving killed a Brahmin boy. This sin was atoned for by the Purohita's using his Vārśa Sāman (chant). The [[शाट्यायन|Śāṭyāyana]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], cited by Sāyaṇa,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1229> On Rv., ''loc. cit.'' See also the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] version in Oertel, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 20.</ref> elaborates the tale. As Vṛśa had held the reins, king and priest accused each other of the murder. The Ikṣvākus being consulted threw the responsibility for the crime on Vṛśa, who thereupon revived the boy by the Vārśa Sāman. In consequence of this unfairness of theirs--being Kṣatriyas they were partial to a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]--Agni's glow ceased to burn in their houses. In response to their appeal to restore it, Vṛśa came to them, saw the Piśācī (demoness), who, in the form of Trasadasyu's wife, had stolen the glow, and succeeded in restoring it to Agni. This version with some variations occurs also in the Bṛhaddevatā,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1229> v. 14 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes.</ref> which connects the story with a hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1229> v. 2.</ref> Sieg's attempt<ref name=fx6_ve1_1229> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 64-76. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Festtgruss an Roth,'' 192.</ref> to show that the hymn really refers to this tale is not at all successful.<ref name=fx7_ve1_1229> See Oldenberg, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 46, 366 ''et seq.;<br> [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 312;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Go7ttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen,'' 1903, 240 ''et seq.''</ref> <br><br>It is clear that [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]] must here mean ‘descendant of [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]],’ and not King [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]] himself. The difference of the patronymics, [[त्रैवृष्ण|Traivṛṣṇa]] and [[त्रैधात्व|Traidhātva]], by which he is referred to can best be explained by assuming that there were two kings, Trivṛṣan and Tridhātu (or possibly Tridhanvan), from whom Tryaruṇa was descended.<ref name=fx8_ve1_1229> See Sieg, ''op. cit.,'' 74-76, and '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]].'''</ref> The connexion with the Ikṣvākus is important (see '''[[इक्ष्वाकु|Ikṣvāku]]''').

त्र्य्-अवि
<u>'''Try-avi'''</u> designates a calf eighteen months old<ref name=fx1_ve1_1230> The etymological meaning is apparently ‘having three sheep (periods)’ -that is, ‘having periods of thrice six months,’ just as the adjective ''[[पञ्चावि|pañcāvi]]'' means ‘having five periods of six months,’ or ‘thirty months old.’</ref> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1230> iii. 55, 14.</ref> and later Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1230> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 2;<br> xviii. 12, etc. (in the form ''[[त्रिय्अवि|triyavi]]'');<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiv. 10;<br> xviii. 26, etc.</ref>

त्र्य्-आशिर्
<u>'''Try-āśir,'''</u> ‘with three admixtures,’ is an epithet of Soma in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1231> v. 27, 5. ''Cf.'' perhaps viii. 2, 7 (''traya Indrasya somāḥ sutāsaḥ,'' ‘three kinds of Soma pressed for Indra’).</ref> According to Sāyaṇa this means mixed with curds ('''[[दधि|Dadhi]]'''), meal ('''[[सक्तु|Saktu]]'''), and milk ('''[[पयस्|Payas]]'''). More accurately it would seem<ref name=fx2_ve1_1231> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologic,'' 1, 209;<br> Oldenberg, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 46, 422.</ref> to denote the milk (''[[गवाशिर्|gavāśir]]''), the barley (''[[यवाशिर्|yavāśir]]''), and the curds (''[[दध्य्आशिर्|dadhyāśir]]''), which were used to mix with the Soma.

त्वच्
<u>'''Tvac,'''</u> ‘skin,’ ‘hide,’ (''a'') denotes specially in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1232> i. 79, 3;<br> iii. 21, 5;<br> ix. 65, 25;<br> 66, 29;<br> 70, 7;<br> 79, 4;<br> 101, 11, 16, etc.</ref> the hide used in the process of extracting the '''Soma''' juice from the plant. The Soma was pounded with stones (''adri'') upon the skin laid on the pressing boards (''adhiṣavaṇe phalake''),<ref name=fx2_ve1_1232> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologic,'' 1, 181-183, and '''Adhisavaṇa.'''</ref> which, however, are not mentioned in the Rigveda. Or if a pestle and mortar were used, the skin was still placed underneath them to catch the drops of juice, not above, as Pischel<ref name=fx3_ve1_1232> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 110.</ref> thought. <br><br>(''b'') Tvac also denotes the rind of the Soma plant that remains after the juice has been extracted.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1232> Rv. ix. 86, 44;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7, 13, 1;<br> Hillebrandt, ''op. cit.,'' 52.</ref><br><br>(''c'') Metaphorically the term ''kṛṣṇā tvac,'' ‘the black skins,’ is applied to the aboriginal enemies of the invading Āryans.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1232> Rv. i. 130, 8, and probably ix. 41, 1, for which, however, ''cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''op. cit.,'' 51, n. 2, and see '''[[दास|Dāsa]].'''</ref>

त्वष्टृ
<u>'''Tvaṣṭṛ'''</u> is employed once in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1233> xii. 3, 33. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 688;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 651.</ref> to denote a ‘carpenter,’ with a deliberate play on the name of the god [[त्वष्टृ|Tvaṣṭṛ]]. He is there mentioned as using an axe (''[[स्वधिति|svadhiti]]'') to fashion (from wood) ‘a well-made form’ (''rūpaṃ sukṛtam''). See '''[[तष्टृ|Taṣṭṛ]].'''

त्वाष्ट्र
<u>'''Tvāṣṭra,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[त्वष्टृ|Tvaṣṭṛ]],’ is the patronymic, in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1234> ii. 6, 3 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]] = ii. 5, 22 Mādhyaṃdina);<br> iv. 6, 3 (= iv. 5, 28).</ref> of the mythical teacher '''Ābhūti.'''

त्सरु
<u>'''Tsaru,'''</u>--(''a'') This word seems to denote some sort of crawling animal in one passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1235> vii. 50, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 99.</ref><br><br>(''b'') In the later literature the word means a ‘handle,’ as of a beaker ('''[[चमस|Camasa]]''').<ref name=fx1b_ve1_1235/> In this sense also it seems to occur in the description of the plough ('''[[लाङ्गल|Lāṅgala]]''') in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1235> iii. 17, 3, where the ordinary text has ''soma-satsaru'' (so the Pada text), and the Paippalāda recension has ''somapitsalam.''</ref> and the later Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1235> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 5, 6, has ''[[सुमति-त्सरु|sumati-tsaru]];<br>'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 7, 12;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvi. 12;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xii. 71;<br> [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 34, have ''[[सोमपित्सरु|somapitsaru]],'' which [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] renders as ‘provided with a handle for the drinker of Soma’ (''i.e., [[सोमपि-त्सरु|somapi-tsaru]]''). Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 255, suggests ''soma-sa-[[त्सरु|tsaru]],'' ‘with (''sa-'') strap (''uman,'' a conjectural word) and handle’ (''[[त्सरु|tsaru]]''). Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 116, prefers to read throughout ''[[सुमति-त्सरु|sumati-tsaru]],'' ‘with well-smoothed handle,’ from the root seen in ''matī-kṛ,'' etc. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 236;<br> Bühler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 14, 13.</ref> 

त्सारिन्
<u>'''Tsārin'''</u> denotes, in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1236> i. 134, 5.</ref> a ‘hunter’ engaged in the chase of the ''takva'' (an unknown beast), according to Ludwig and Max Müller.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1236> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 448.</ref> But this explanation is quite conjectural.

दंश
<u>'''Daṃśa'''</u> (lit., ‘biter’), ‘gad-fly,’ is mentioned in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 9, 3; 10, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

दंष्ट्र
<u>'''Daṃṣṭra,'''</u> denoting a prominent tooth, ‘tusk,’ or ‘fang’ of an animal, occurs often from the Rigveda onwards.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1238> Rv. ii. 13, 4;<br> x. 87, 3;<br> Av. iv. 36, 2;<br> x. 5, 43;<br> xvi. 7, 3, etc.</ref>

दक्ष कात्यायनि आत्रेय
<u>'''Dakṣa [[कात्यायनि|Kātyāyani]] Ātreya'''</u> (‘descendant of Atri’) is mentioned in the Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) of the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 41, 1; iv. 17, 1) as a pupil of '''[[शङ्ख बाभ्रव्य|Śaṅkha Bābhravya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

दक्ष जयन्त लौहित्य
<u>'''Dakṣa [[जयन्त|Jayanta]] Lauhitya'''</u> (‘descendant of Lohita’) is mentioned in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 42, 1) as a pupil of '''[[कृष्णरात लौहित्य|Kṛṣṇarāta Lauhitya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

दक्ष पार्वति
<u>'''Dakṣa Pārvati'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[पर्वत|Parvata]]'''’) is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1241> ii. 4, 4, 6.</ref> as having performed a certain rite which his descendants, the Dākṣāyaṇas, still maintained, thus enjoying royal dignity down to the time of the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] itself. He appears in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1241> iv. 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 223;<br> 4, 358;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 374 ''et seq.;<br>'' Lévi, ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 138.</ref> also.

दक्षिणतस्-कपर्द
<u>'''Dakṣiṇatas-kaparda'''</u> is an epithet of the '''Vasiṣṭhas''' in the Rigveda (vii. 33, 1) referring to their mode of ‘wearing the hair in a braid on the right side.’ See '''[[कपर्द|Kaparda]].''' <br>==Foot Notes==

दक्षिणा
<u>'''Dakṣiṇā'''</u> appears repeatedly in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1243> A whole hymn, Rv. x. 107, is devoted to its praise. ''Cf.'' i. 168, 7;<br> vi. 27, 8;<br> viii. 24, 29;<br> 39, 5;<br> x. 62, 1, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1243> Av. iv. 11, 4;<br> v. 7, 11;<br> xi. 7, 9;<br> 8, 22;<br> xiii. 1, 52;<br> xviii. 4, 8, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 7, 3, 1;<br> 8, 1, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iv. 19, 23;<br> xix. 30;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 3, 3 ''et seq.;<br>'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 9, 3, 1 ''et seq.'' The verses (''[[गाथा|gāthā]] [[नाराशंसी|nārāśaṃsī]],'' either as a single expression or as two separate terms) used to win these Dakṣiṇās were notoriously false. See [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiv. 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 2, 6. 7;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], i. 7;<br> xi. 2.</ref> as the designation of the gift presented to priests at the sacrifice, apparently because a cow--a prolific (''[[दक्षिणा|dakṣiṇā]]'') one--was the usual ‘fee’<ref name=fx3_ve1_1243> The transition of meaning is similar in the use of the English word ‘fee’;<br> ‘cattle,’ ‘money,’ ‘payment for service’ (see Murray's English Dictionary, ''s.v.'' ‘fee’). ''Cf.'' also '''[[गो-दान|Go-dāna]],''' n. 4.</ref> on such an occasion.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1243> ''Cf.'' the rule that when nothing is specified a cow is the [[दक्षिणा|Dakṣiṇā]], Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 2, 13;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 1, 2.</ref> The later [[दान|Dāna]]-stutis, or ‘Praises of Gifts,’ in the Rigveda immensely exaggerate these donations, and the exaggeration grows in the Brāhmaṇas. It is important to notice that these enumerations of gifts in the main include nothing but articles of personal property, such as kine, horses, buffaloes, or camels (''uṣṭra''), ornaments, and so forth, but not land.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1243> So, ''e.g.,'' Rv. i. 126, 1-4;<br> v. 30, 12-15;<br> viii. 1, 32. 33;<br> 3, 21 ''et seq.;<br>'' 4, 19-21;<br> 5, 37-39;<br> 6, 46-48;<br> 55;<br> 56;<br> vii. 18, 21-24, and the full list in Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 273-277. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 49 ''et seq.'' Clothes (''[[वासस्|vāsas]]'') and gold are mentioned as a [[दक्षिणा|Dakṣiṇā]] in Av. ix. 5, 14. The four Dakṣiṇās, according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 3, 4, 7, are gold, a cow, clothes, and a horse. This is practically exhaustive if the trappings of the horse and ornaments are included.</ref> Reference is, however, made in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx6_ve1_1243> xiii. 7, 1, 13, with which compare xiii. 6, 2, 18, where the Brahmin's land is excluded;<br> and see xiii. 7, 1, 15, where the gift of land is disapproved.</ref> to land as a [[दक्षिणा|Dakṣiṇā]], but with disapproval, probably because the land came to be regarded as inalienable without the consent of the clansmen.<ref name=fx7_ve1_1243> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 1, 1, 4. ''Cf.'' above, pp. 100, n. 19, 246;<br> below, pp. 351, 352.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 169171;<br> Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 104, 105;<br> Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 96-98;<br> Bloomfield, ''Religion of the Veda,'' 69-74;<br> ''Atharvaveda,'' 76 ''et seq.,'' 100, 121.</ref>

दक्षिणा-पथ
<u>'''Dakṣiṇā-patha'''</u> (lit., ‘the road to the south’), ‘the south country,’ is found, probably as a designation of the Deccan, as early as the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1244> i. 1, 2, 13. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 394, n., and [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], v. 13.</ref> coupled with  Surāṣṭra. A similar expression is ''[[दक्षिणा|dakṣiṇā]] padā,'' ‘with southward foot,’ in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1244> x. 61, 8.</ref> referring to the place where the exile (''[[परा-वृज्|parā-vṛj]]'') goes on being expelled. This no doubt simply means ‘the south’ beyond the limits of the recognized Āryan world, which even as late as the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1244> ii. 13.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 185;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 408;<br> Rhys Davids, Buddhist India, 30;<br> Keith ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 28, n. 1;<br> ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 200.</ref> appears as bounded by the Vindhyas on the south.

दक्षिणा-प्रष्टि
<u>'''Dakṣiṇā-praṣṭi'''</u> denotes ‘the side horse on the right.’ It appears from two passages of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1245> v. 1, 4, 9;<br> ix. 4, 2, 11 (this passage appears to speak of three horses only, but ''of.'' v. 4, 3, 17). ''Cf.'' also [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 13, 12.</ref> that there were at times four horses yoked to the chariot, the right and the left yoke horse (''[[दक्षिणा-युग्य|dakṣiṇā-yugya]], savyā-yugya'') in the middle, flanked by one on each side, the two latter of course not being fastened to the yoke at all, but presumably by traces alongside of the yoke horses. See '''[[रथ|Ratha]].'''

दक्षिणायन
<u>'''Dakṣiṇāyana.'''</u> See '''[[सूर्य|Sūrya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

दक्षिणा-युग्य
<u>'''Dakṣiṇā-yugya,'''</u> ‘the yoke horse on the right,’ is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (v. 1, 4, 6; 4, 3, 8; ix. 4, 2, 11). See '''[[रथ|Ratha]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

दण्ड
<u>'''Daṇḍa,'''</u> ‘staff.’ (''a'') This word is often mentioned in the ordinary sense; for example, when used for driving cattle<ref name=fx1_ve1_1248> Rv. vii. 33, 6.</ref> (''go-ajanāsaḥ''), or as a weapon.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1248> Av. v. 5, 4. ''Cf.'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 35;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 4, 6, etc.</ref> A staff was given to a man on consecration for driving away demons, according to the Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_1248> iii. 2, 1, 32.</ref> The staff also played a part in the initiation (''upanayana'') of a youth on attaining manhood.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1248> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 19;<br> 22;<br> Sāṅkhāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 1, 6, 11, etc.</ref> In a modified sense the word is used to denote the handle of a ladle or similar implement.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1248> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 4, 1, 36. Of a musical instrument, Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, viii. 9;<br> Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvii. 3, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> <br><br>(''b'') The ‘staff’ as the symbol of temporal power, implying punishment, is applied by the king (''rāja-preṣito daṇḍaḥ'').<ref name=fx1b_ve1_1248/> The king, in modern phraseology, was the source of criminal law; and he clearly retained this branch of law in his own hands even in later times.<ref name=fx2b_ve1_1248/> The punishment of the non-guilty (''a-daṇḍya'') is given as one of the characteristics of the nonBrahminical '''Vrātyas''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3b_ve1_1248/> See also '''[[धर्म|Dharma]].'''

दण्ड औपर
<u>'''Daṇḍa Aupara'''</u> (‘descendant of Upara’) is mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (vi. 2, 9, 4) and the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (iii. 8, 7) as having performed a certain rite.<br>==Foot Notes==

दण्डन
<u>'''Daṇḍana'''</u> occurs in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1250> xii. 2, 54. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 682.</ref> among other names of ‘reed’ or ‘cane.’

दत्त तापस
<u>'''Datta Tāpasa'''</u> was [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] priest at the snake festival described in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1251> xxv. 15, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 35.</ref>

दधि
<u>'''Dadhi,'''</u> ‘sour milk,’ is repeatedly mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1252> viii. 2, 9;<br> ix. 87, 1, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1252> Av. iii. 12, 7;<br> iv. 34, 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 3, 4, etc.;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xviii. 5, 12, etc.</ref> The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1252> i. 8, 1, 7. ''Cf.'' Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 348.</ref> mentions in order '''Ghrta''' (‘clarified butter’), [[दधि|Dadhi]], '''[[मस्तु|Mastu]],''' which Eggeling<ref name=fx4_ve1_1252> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 218.</ref> renders ‘whey,’ and '''[[आमिक्षा|Āmikṣā]],''' ‘curds.’ [[दधि|Dadhi]] often has the meaning of ‘curds’ also. It was used for mixing with '''Soma.'''<ref name=fx5_ve1_1252> ''[[दध्य्आशिर्|Dadhyāśir]],'' ‘mixed with sour milk,’ is an epithet of Soma in Rv. i. 5, 5;<br> 137, 2;<br> v. 51, 7;<br> vii. 32, 4. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 219 ''et seq.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 227.</ref>

दध्यञ्च् आथर्वण
<u>'''Dadhyañc Ātharvaṇa'''</u> is a purely mythical sage. In the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1253> i. 80, 16;<br> 84, 13, 14;<br> 116, 12;<br> 117, 22;<br> 119, 9, etc. See Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 141, 142;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 176.</ref> he is clearly a divinity of some kind, but in the later  Saṃhitās<ref name=fx2_ve1_1253> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 4, 4;<br> 6, 6, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xix. 4.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx3_ve1_1253> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 5, 18;<br> vi. 4, 2, 3;<br> xiv. 1, 1, 18. 20. 25;<br> 4, 13;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 5, 22;<br> iv. 5, 28, etc.</ref> he is metamorphosed into a teacher. In the Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmana<ref name=fx4_ve1_1253> xii. 8, 6. So also Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 21.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' xxxv;<br> ''Atharvaveda,'' 23, 116, 118, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> he is by oversight called an [[आङ्गिरस|Āṅgirasa]].

दध्य्-आशिर्
<u>'''Dadhy-āśir.'''</u> See '''[[दधि|Dadhi]]''' and '''Soma.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

दन्त्
<u>'''Dant, Danta,'''</u> ‘tooth,’ is frequently mentioned from the Rigveda onwards.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1255> Rv. vii. 55, 2;<br> x. 68, 6;<br> Av. v. 23, 3;<br> 29, 4;<br> vi. 56, 3, etc. The more usual form is Danta, Rv. iv. 6, 8;<br> vi. 75, 11;<br> Av. iv. 3, 6, etc.</ref> Cleansing (''dhāv'') the teeth was an ordinary act, especially in preparation for a sacrifice, and accompanied bathing, shaving of the hair and beard (''[[केश|keśa]]-[[श्मश्रु|śmaśru]]''), and the cutting of the nails.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1255> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 6, 2 (not exactly paralleled in [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 1, 2 ''et seq.'').</ref> A hymn of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_1255> vi. 140.</ref> celebrates the appearance of the first two teeth of a child, though its exact interpretation is doubtful.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1255> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 321;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 224;<br> Grill, ''Hundert Lieder,''^2 176;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 540, 541;<br> ''Atharvaveda,'' 71;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 386.</ref> In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_1255> vii. 14;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 18.</ref> there is a reference to a child's first teeth falling out. The word seems in the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve1_1255> iv. 6, 8;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 99;<br> Oldenberg, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 46, 341, 342.</ref> once to denote an elephant's tusk. Whether dentistry was practised is doubtful. The occurrence in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx7_ve1_1255> ii. 1, 5.</ref> of '''[[हिरण्य-दन्त्|Hiraṇya-dant]],''' ‘gold-toothed,’ as the name of a man, is perhaps significant, especially as it is certain that the stopping of teeth with gold was known at Rome as early as the legislation of the Twelve Tables.<ref name=fx8_ve1_1255> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 206. See Wordsworth, ''Fragments and Specimens of Early Latin,'' 537.</ref>

दभीति
<u>'''Dabhīti'''</u> appears several times in the Rigveda as a hero or sage. Indra overcomes on his behalf '''[[चुमुरि|Cumuri]]''' and '''[[धुनि|Dhuni]];'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_1256> x. 113, 9;<br> ii. 15, 9;<br> vii. 19, 4.</ref>  he pressed Soma for Indra,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1256> vi. 20, 13.</ref> who rewarded him.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1256> vi. 26, 6.</ref> For him 30,000 '''Dāsas''' were sent to sleep,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1256> iv. 30, 21.</ref> and for him the '''Dasyus''' were bound without cords.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1256> ii. 13, 9.</ref> [[दभीति|Dabhīti]] also appears, with '''[[तुर्वीति|Turvīti]],''' as a protégé of the Aśvins.<ref name=fx6_ve1_1256> i. 112, 23.</ref> There seems no reason to deny that he was a real person.<ref name=fx7_ve1_1256> Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 155, 157, 158.<br><br>''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 162.</ref>

दम
<u>'''Dama,'''</u> ‘house,’ is a word that occurs several times in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1257> i. 1, 8;<br> 61, 9;<br> 75, 5;<br> 143, 4;<br> ii. 1, 2, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, viii. 24.</ref> It denotes, according to Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1257> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' But this seems very doubtful in view of the apparent connexion of  and , ‘build,’ in Greek.</ref> the place in which a man wields uncontrolled power (from the root ''dam,'' ‘control’).

दम्-पति
<u>'''Dam-pati'''</u> denotes ‘the master of the house’<ref name=fx1_ve1_1258> For the form, ''cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 37, n. 9. Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2. 307 ''et seq.,'' argues in favour of the spelling ''daṃpati'' (adopted by Geldner in his ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]], Glossar''). ''Cf. patir dan.'' Rv. i. 149, 2;<br> Oldenberg, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 46, 176, 177.</ref> in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1258> i. 127, 8;<br> ii. 39, 2;<br> v. 22, 4;<br> viii. 69. 16;<br> 84, 7.</ref> but is more often used in the dual to designate ‘the master and the mistress,’<ref name=fx3_ve1_1258> Rv. v. 3, 2;<br> viii. 31, 5;<br> x. 10, 5;<br> 68, 2;<br> 85, 32;<br> 95, 12, etc.;<br> Av. vi. 123, 3;<br> xii. 3, 14;<br> xiv. 2, 9, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 418, 420.</ref> an expression that may legitimately be deemed to show the high status of women at the time of the Rigveda. See '''[[स्त्री|Strī]].'''

दर्भ
<u>'''Darbha'''</u> is the name of a grass in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1259> i. 191, 3 (with '''[[शर|Śara]]''' and '''Kuśara,''' varieties of grass).</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1259> Av. vi. 43, 2;<br> viii. 7, 20;<br> x. 4, 13;<br> xi. 6, 15;<br> xix. 28, 1. etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 5, 1, 4, etc.</ref> In the Atharvaveda it is used for the calming of anger (''manyuśamana''),<ref name=fx3_ve1_1259> Av. vi. 43.</ref> and as an amulet for protection against the scattering of one's hair or the striking of one's breast.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1259> xix. 32, 2. ''Cf.'' xix. 30.</ref> It is also said to be ‘rich in roots’ (''bhūri-[[मूल|mūla]]''),<ref name=fx5_ve1_1259> Av. vi. 43, 2.</ref> to possess a thousand leaves (''sahasra-[[पर्ण|parṇa]]'') and a hundred stalks (''śata-kāṇḍa'').<ref name=fx6_ve1_1259> Av. xix. 32, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 70.</ref> 

दर्वि
<u>'''Darvi,'''</u> or '''Darvī,''' properly denotes a ‘ladle,’ in which sense it is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1260> v. 6, 9;<br> x. 105, 10.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1260> Av. iii. 10, 7;<br> iv. 14, 7;<br> ix. 6, 17, etc.</ref> But the word also means a serpent's ‘hood’ in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1260> x. 1, 13. See Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 577. Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 153.</ref> though Zimmer regards it as the name of a serpent.<br><br>^4 ''Altindisches Leben,'' 95, where he takes '''[[करिक्रत|Karikrata]]''' also as the name of a snake.

दर्विदा
<u>'''Darvidā,'''</u> the ‘woodpecker,’ is mentioned as a victim at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] or horse sacrifice, in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1261> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 13, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 15, Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 3. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 93. The St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' suggests ‘woodpiercer’ (''[[दारु|dāru]]-vidha'') as the literal sense. On the etymology, ''cf.'' F. W. Thomas's article. ‘The D.Suffix,’ p. 121, in ''Transactions of the Cambridge Philological Society,'' 5, part ii.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[दार्व्आघात|Dārvāghāta]].'''

दर्श
<u>'''Darśa'''</u> (‘appearance’) denotes the new moon day,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1262> Av. vii. 81, 3, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 1, 14;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 2, 2, 1.</ref> usually in opposition to the day of full moon (''[[पूर्ण-मास|pūrṇa-māsa]]'').<ref name=fx2_ve1_1262> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 4, 1, etc.</ref> Most frequently the word occurs in the compound<ref name=fx3_ve1_1262> ''Ibid.,'' i. 6, 7, 1;<br> 9, 3;<br> ii. 5, 6, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 2, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 5, 11, etc.</ref> ''[[दर्श|darśa]]-pūrṇamāsau,'' ‘new and full moon,’ the days of special ritual importance.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1262> Hillebrandt, ''Das altindische Neuund Vollmondsopfer,'' Jena, 1880;<br> ''Rituallitteratur,'' 111-114;<br> Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 439.</ref> The order of the first two words here is worthy of note, for it distinctly suggests, though it does not conclusively prove, that the month was reckoned from new moon to new moon, not from full moon to full moon. See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''

दश-ग्व
<u>'''Daśa-gva'''</u> appears in one hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1263> viii. 12, 2</ref> as the name of a person who was assisted by Indra. The other references in that work,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1263> They are mentioned with the Navagvas in i. 62, 4;<br> iii. 39, 5;<br> iv. 51, 4;<br> v. 29, 12;<br> x. 62, 6, and alone in ii. 34, 12. See Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 144 (C).</ref> however, clearly show the mythical character of the Daśagvas, and of any individual among them. 

दशतयी
<u>'''Daśatayī'''</u> in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1264> vii. 8. 20;<br> xi. 16;<br> xii. 40.</ref> frequently denotes the text of the Rigveda as divided into ten Maṇḍalas.

दश-द्यु
<u>'''Daśa-dyu'''</u> appears twice in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1265> i. 33, 14;<br> vi. 26, 4. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 55, 328.</ref> as the name of a hero, but nothing can be made out regarding him or his relation to '''[[वेतसु|Vetasu]],''' who is mentioned in one passage along with him.

दशन्
<u>'''Daśan,'''</u> ‘ten,’ forms the basis of the numerical system of the Vedic Indians, as it does of the Āryan people generally. But it is characteristic of India<ref name=fx1_ve1_1266> Thibaut, ''Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik,'' 70.</ref> that there should be found at a very early period long series of names for very high numerals, whereas the Āryan knowledge did not go beyond 1,000. In the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_1266> xvii. 2 ''et seq. Cf.'' xxii. 34;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 1, 2, 16.</ref> the list is 1; 10; 100; 1,000; 10,000 (''ayuta''); 100,000 (''niyuta''); 1,000,000 (''prayuta''); 10,000,000 (''[[अर्बुद|arbuda]]''); 100,000,000 (''nyarbuda''); 1,000,000,000 (''[[सम्उद्र|samudra]]''); 10,000,000,000 (''madhya''); 100,000,000,000 (''anta''); 1,000,000,000,000 (''parārdha''). In the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve1_1266> xxxix. 6. In xvii. 10 the number ''badva'' disappears, and the list corresponds with that of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, except for the fact that ''niyuta'' and ''prayuta'' change places.</ref> the list is the same, but ''niyuta'' and ''prayuta'' exchange places, and after ''nyarbuda'' a new figure (''badva'') intervenes, thus increasing ''[[सम्उद्र|samudra]]'' to 10,000,000,000, and so on. The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā has in two places<ref name=fx4_ve1_1266> iv. 4, 11, 4;<br> vii. 2, 20, 1.</ref> exactly the same list as the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā. The Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx5_ve1_1266> ii. 8, 14.</ref> has the list ''ayuta, prayuta,'' then ''ayuta'' again, ''[[अर्बुद|arbuda]], nyarbuda, [[सम्उद्र|samudra]], madhya, anta, parārdha.'' The [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx6_ve1_1266> xvii. 14, 2.</ref> has the Vājasaneyi list up to ''nyarbuda'' inclusive, then follow ''nikharvaka, badva, akṣita,'' and apparently ''go'' = 1,000,000,000,000. The Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx7_ve1_1266> i. 10, 28, 29. ''Cf.'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 3, 2;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 30, n. 2;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka'' 293, 294.</ref> list  replaces ''nikharvaka'' by ''nikharva, badva'' by ''padma,'' and ends with ''akṣitir vyomāntaḥ.'' The [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx8_ve1_1266> xv. 11, 7.</ref> continues the series after ''nyarbuda'' with ''nikharvāda, [[सम्उद्र|samudra]], salila, antya, ananta'' (= 10 billions).<br><br>But beyond ''ayuta''<ref name=fx9_ve1_1266> ''Cf.'' Rv. iii. 6, 15;<br> viii. 1, 5;<br> 2, 41, 21, 18;<br> 34, 15;<br> 46, 22;<br> Av. viii. 2, 21;<br> 8, 7;<br> x. 8, 24;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xix. 13, 6;<br> xxi. 18, 3, etc. Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 348, considers that it has not any definite sense in the Rigveda;<br> this cannot be either proved or disproved. The Rv. has the phrase ''śatā sahasrāṇi'' several times (iv. 32, 18;<br> viii. 32, 18, etc.) = 100,000;<br> and ''ayuta'' may easily have been already specialized, though it may also have retained a vague sense.</ref> none of these numbers has any vitality. ''Badva,'' indeed, occurs in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx10_ve1_1266> vii. 21. 23.</ref> but it cannot there have any precise numerical sense;<ref name=fx11_ve1_1266> Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 96.</ref> and later on the names of these high numerals are very much confused.<br><br>An arithmetical progression of some interest is found in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx12_ve1_1266> xviii. 3. ''Cf.'' Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 10, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxii. 9, 1-6.</ref> where occurs a list of sacrificial gifts in which each successive figure doubles the amount of the preceding one. It begins with ''[[द्वादश|dvādaśa]]-mānaṃ hiraṇyam,'' ‘gold to the value of 12’ (the unit being uncertain, but probably the '''[[कृष्णल|Kṛṣṇala]]'''),<ref name=fx13_ve1_1266> ''Cf.'' Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxii. 9, 1;<br> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 102, 103.</ref> followed by ‘to the value of 24, 48, 96, 192, 384, 768, 1,536, 3072,’ then ''dve aṣṭāviṃśati-śata-māne,'' which must mean 2×128×24 (the last unit being not a single ''[[मान|māna]],'' but a number of 24 ''mānas'') = 6,144, then 12,288, 24,576, 49,152, 98,304, 196,608, 393, 216. With these large numbers may be compared the minute theoretical subdivision of time found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx14_ve1_1266> xii. 3, 2, 1 ''et seq. Cf.'' also [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 10, 1, 1, where a series of names of the divisions of the ''[[मुहूर्त|muhūrta]]'' is given, apparently as alternatives, not as successive stages (''idānīm, tadānīm, etarhi, kṣipram, ajiram, āśuḥ (? [[आशु|āśu]]), nimeṣaḥ, phaṇaḥ, dravan, atidravan, tvaran, tvaramāṇaḥ, āśuḥ, āśīyān, javaḥ''). See Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 92-94.</ref> where a day is divided into 15 ''muhūrtas''--1 ''[[मुहूर्त|muhūrta]]'' = 15 ''kṣipras,'' 1 ''kṣipra'' = 15 ''etarhis,'' 1 ''etarhi'' = 15 ''idānis,'' 1 ''idāni'' = 15 ''prāṇas.'' The [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx15_ve1_1266> xiv. 75 ''et seq. Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Araṇyaka, vii. 20.</ref> has a decimal division of the day into 15 ''muhūrtas''-1 ''[[मुहूर्त|muhūrta]]'' = 10 ''nimeṣas,'' 1 ''nimeṣa'' = 10 ''dhvaṃsis.''<br><br>Few fractions are mentioned in Vedic literature. ''Ardha, [[पाद|pāda]], [[शफ|śapha]],'' and ''[[कला|kalā]]'' denote (1/2), (1/4), (1/8), (1/16) respectively, but only  the first two are common. ''Tṛtīya'' denotes the third part.<ref name=fx16_ve1_1266> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 1, 4;<br> v. 2, 6, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 6, 1;<br> 7, 1, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 4, 4, etc.</ref> In the Rigveda<ref name=fx17_ve1_1266> vi. 69, 8 = Av. vii. 44, 1 = [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 11, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 15;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 1, 13.</ref> Indra and Viṣṇu are said to have divided 1,000 by 3, though how they did so is uncertain. ''Tri-pād'' denotes ‘three-fourths.’<ref name=fx18_ve1_1266> Rv. x. 90, 4.</ref><br><br>There is no clear evidence that the Indians of the Vedic period had any knowledge of numerical figures, though it is perfectly possible.<ref name=fx19_ve1_1266> If ''[[अष्ट-कर्णी|aṣṭa-karṇī]]'' means in Rv. x. 62, 7, having the figure 8 marked on the ears' of cattle, then the mention of numerical signs would be certain. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 234, 235, 348. But this is doubtful. See Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 309, n. 10.<br><br>''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 308;<br> Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 90-103;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 349;<br> Kaegi, ''Rigveda,'' n. 65;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 275 ''et seq.''</ref>

दश-पुरुषं-राज्य
<u>'''Daśa-puruṣaṃ-rājya,'''</u> occurring in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1267> xii. 9, 3, 1. 3.</ref> doubtless<ref name=fx2_ve1_1267> ''Cf.'' Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 3;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 14, 18. So ''tri-[[पुरुष|puruṣa]],'' ‘three generations,’ [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 7. The St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' and Eggeling ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 269, have the correct rendering.</ref> means ‘sovereignty inherited through ten ancestors,’ a striking case of hereditary rule. Weber<ref name=fx3_ve1_1267> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 209. But see 10, 75, n. 1.</ref> once rendered the word as the ‘kingdom<ref name=fx4_ve1_1267> This would be ''[[साम्राज्य|sāmrājya]],'' which is always spelt with ''m,'' not ''ṃ;<br> cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' 75, 3.</ref> of Daśapuru,’ comparing the Daśapura of Kālidāsa's Meghadūta<ref name=fx5_ve1_1267> i. 48.</ref> and the Daśārṇa of the ‘middle country.’

दश-मास्य
<u>'''Daśa-māsya,'''</u> ‘ten months old,’ describes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1268> v. 78, 7-8.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1268> Av. i. 11, 6;<br> iii. 23, 2. There are several references in Vedic literature to birth in the tenth month, as Rv. x. 184, 3, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 366;<br> Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 313, n. 1.</ref> the embryo immediately before birth. See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''

दशमी
<u>'''Daśamī'''</u> denotes in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1269> iii. 4, 7.</ref> and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1269> xxii. 14.</ref> the period of life between 90 and 100 years  which the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_1269> i. 158, 6.</ref> calls the ''daśama yuga,'' ‘the tenth stage of life.’ Longevity seems not to have been rare among the Vedic Indians, for the desire to live a ‘hundred autumns’ (''śaradaḥ śatam'') is constantly expressed.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1269> Rv. i. 89, 9;<br> x. 18, 10, and ''passim.'' See Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 384;<br> Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 62, 63.</ref> '''[[दीर्घतमस्|Dīrghatamas]]''' is said to have lived 100 years,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1269> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 17.</ref> and '''[[महिदास ऐतरेय|Mahidāsa Aitareya]]''' is credited with 116.<ref name=fx6_ve1_1269> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 16, 7;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 2, 11;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 17.</ref> Onesikritos<ref name=fx7_ve1_1269> In Strabo, p. 701.</ref> reported that they sometimes lived 130 years, a statement with which corresponds the wish expressed in the Jātaka<ref name=fx8_ve1_1269> Ed. Fausbo7ll, ii. 16.</ref> for a life of 120 years. Probably the number was always rather imaginary than real, but the comparative brevity of modern life in India<ref name=fx9_ve1_1269> ''Indian Empire,'' 1, 513 ''et seq.''</ref> may be accounted for by the cumulative effect of fever, which is hardly known to the Rigveda. See '''[[तक्मन्|Takman]].'''

दश-वृक्ष
<u>'''Daśa-vṛkṣa'''</u> is the name of a tree, according to Roth,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1270> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1270> ii. 9, 1.</ref> But Whitney<ref name=fx3_ve1_1270> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 50.</ref> treats the word as a mere adjective meaning ‘of ten trees.’

दश-व्रज
<u>'''Daśa-vraja'''</u> is the name of a protégé of the Aśvins in the Rigveda (viii. 8, 20; 49, 1; 50, 9).<br>==Foot Notes==

दश-शिप्र
<u>'''Daśa-śipra'''</u> is the name of a sacrificer mentioned in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1272> viii. 52, 2. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 163.</ref>

दशा
<u>'''Daśā'''</u> denotes the ‘fringe’ or ‘border’ of a garment (''vāsaḥ'') in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1273> iii. 3, 2, 9, and often in the Sūtras.</ref> The word also occurs in the compound ''[[दशा|daśā]]-[[पवित्र|pavitra]],''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1273> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 32;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 2, 2, 11. ''Cf.'' iv. 1, 1. 28.</ref> which means ‘a filtering cloth with a fringe.’ 

दशोणि
<u>'''Daśoṇi'''</u> appears in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1274> vi. 20, 4, 8.</ref> apparently as a favourite of Indra and as opposed to the '''Paṇis,''' who fell in hundreds for his benefit. The view of Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_1274> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 156;<br> 5, 107.</ref> that he is here the priest of the Paṇis is very improbable. Elsewhere his name is simply mentioned.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1274> x. 96, 12, where, however, the word may be merely an epithet of Soma.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 92, n. 1;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 55, 328.</ref> See also '''[[दशोण्य|Daśoṇya]].'''

दशोण्य
<u>'''Daśoṇya'''</u> is the name of a sacrificer mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1275> viii. 52, 2. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 163.</ref> along with '''[[दशशिप्र|Daśaśipra]]''' and others. Whether he is identical with '''[[दशोणि|Daśoṇi]]''' cannot be decided.

दशोनसि
<u>'''Daśonasi'''</u> is the name of a kind of snake in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1276> x. 4, 17. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 95;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 577.</ref> The reading of the Paippalāda recension is Naśonaśī.

दस्यवे वृक
<u>'''Dasyave vṛka,'''</u> ‘wolf to the '''[[दस्यु|Dasyu]],'''’ is the name of a man mentioned four times in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1277> viii. 51, 2;<br> 55, 1;<br> 56, 1. 2.</ref> In one hymn<ref name=fx2_ve1_1277> viii. 51.</ref> he is called a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]], but in two others<ref name=fx3_ve1_1277> viii. 55. 56.</ref> he is clearly a prince victorious over the Dasyus, and a generous patron of the singer. It is hardly necessary to assume different persons,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1277> Especially as the name occurs only in the small collection of [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] hymns forming the [[वालखिल्य|Vālakhilya]] group in the eighth Maṇḍala.</ref> for the term [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] is not altogether inconsistent with royalty. He was son of '''[[पूतक्रतु|Pūtakratu]]'''<ref name=fx5_ve1_1277> viii. 56, 2. ''[[पौतक्रत|Pautakrata]]. Cf.'' viii. 68, 17.</ref> and '''[[पूतक्रता|Pūtakratā]],'''<ref name=fx6_ve1_1277> viii. 56, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 139, 164;<br> 5, 552.</ref> his wife.

दस्यवे सह
<u>'''Dasyave saha'''</u> is, according to Roth,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1278> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> the name of a man or a clan in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1278> i. 36, 18.</ref> But he admits that the words may  be an epithet of Agni. This is the interpretation given to them by Oldenberg.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1278> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 46, 33.</ref>

दस्यु
<u>'''Dasyu,'''</u> a word of somewhat doubtful origin, is in many passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1279> i. 34, 7;<br> 100, 18;<br> ii. 13, 9, etc. See Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 157, 158.</ref> clearly applied to superhuman enemies. On the other hand, there are several passages in which human foes, probably the aborigines, are thus designated. This may be regarded as certain in those passages where the [[दस्यु|Dasyu]] is opposed to the Āryan, who defeats him with the aid of the gods.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1279> Rv. i. 51, 8;<br> 103, 3;<br> 117, 21;<br> ii. 11, 18, 19;<br> iii. 34, 9;<br> vi. 18, 3;<br> vii. 5, 6;<br> x. 49, 3. Probably also in v. 70, 3;<br> x. 83, 6, people are meant.</ref> The great difference between the Dasyus and the Āryans was their religion: the former are styled ‘not sacrificing,’ ‘devoid of rites,’ ‘addicted to strange vows,’ ‘godhating,’ and so forth.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1279> The [[दस्यु|Dasyu]] is called ''a-karman,'' ‘riteless,’ x. 22, 8;<br> ''a-devayu,'' ‘indifferent to the gods,’ viii. 70, 11;<br> ''a-[[ब्रह्मन्|brahman]],'' ‘without devotion,’ iv. 16, 9;<br> ''a-yajvan,'' ‘not sacrificing,’ viii. 70, 11;<br> ''a-yajyu, id.,'' vii. 6, 3;<br> ''a-[[व्रत|vrata]],'' ‘lawless,’ i. 51, 8;<br> 175, 3;<br> vi. 14, 3;<br> ix. 41, 2;<br> ''anyavrata,'' ‘following strange ordinances,’ viii. 70, 11;<br> ''deva-pīyu,'' ‘reviling the gods,’ Av. xii. 1, 37. It is impossible in all cases to be certain that people are meant.</ref> As compared with the '''[[दास|Dāsa]],''' they are less distinctively a people: no clans (''viśaḥ'') of the Dasyus are mentioned, and while Indra's ''[[दस्यु|dasyu]]-hatya,'' ‘slaughter of the Dasyus,’ is often spoken of, there is no corresponding use of ''[[दास|dāsa]]-hatya.'' That the Dasyus were real people is, however, shown by the epithet ''[[अनास्|anās]]'' applied to them in one passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1279> Rv. v. 29, 10.</ref> The sense of this word is not absolutely certain: the Pada text and Sāyaṇa both take it to mean ‘without face’ (''an-ās''),<ref name=fx6_ve1_1279> This sense allows of two interpretations: ‘misfeatured,’ which seems that of Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' and Grassmann, ''Wo7rterbuch;<br>'' or ‘speechless’ (that is, unable to speak the language of the Āryans), which is that of Bollensen, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 41, 496.</ref> but the other rendering, ‘noseles’ (''a-nās''), is quite possible,<ref name=fx7_ve1_1279> This view is supported by Megasthenes' report as to natives who were: see Strabo, p. 711;<br> Pliny, ''Nat. Hist.,'' vii. 2, 18, cited by Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 430. See also Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 2, 109;<br> 5, 95;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 277;<br> Knauer, Kuhn's ''Zeitschrift,'' 29, 52;<br> Wackernagel, ''Altindische Grammatik,'' 2, 293 (accent).</ref>(**  4 Rv. i. 51, 5, 6; 103, 4; x. 95, 7; 99, 7; 105, 11. ''Cf. [[दस्यु|dasyu]]-han.'' ‘Dasyuslaying,’ i. 100, 12; vi. 45, 24; viii. 76, 11; 77, 3; x. 47, 4 (all of Indra); vi. 16, 15; viii. 39, 8 (of Agni), etc.  and would accord well with the flat-nosed aborigines of the Dravidian<ref name=fx8_ve1_1279> The suggestion in the ''Indian Empire,'' 1, 390, that the modern Brahui type is the true Dravidian, while the modern Dravidian is the result of fusion with Muṇḍā-speaking tribes, would render this theory improbable. But it seems more probable that the Brahuis in speech preserve the tradition of Dravidian settlements in North India.</ref> type, whose language still persists among the Brahuis, who are found in the north-west. This interpretation would receive some support from Vṛtra's being called ‘broken-nosed’ if this were a correct explanation of the obscure word ''rujānās.''<ref name=fx9_ve1_1279> See Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 17, 415 (who takes ''rujānāḥ'' of Rv. i. 32, 8, as = ''rujāna-nāḥ'');<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 31, 32 (who suggests as possible the analysis of the word as ''rujā-anāḥ''). But ''cf.'' Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 361, who suggests the emendation ''rujānaḥ'' as nominative singular of the simple participle ‘broken’;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 59, n. 1.</ref><br><br>The other epithet of the Dasyus is ''[[मृध्र-वाच्|mṛdhra-vāc]],'' which occurs with ''[[अनास्|anās]],''<ref name=fx10_ve1_1279> Rv. v. 29, 10.</ref> and which has been rendered<ref name=fx11_ve1_1279> ''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 2^2, 393 ''et seq.''</ref> ‘of stammering, or unintelligible speech.’ This version is by no means certain, and since the epithet is elsewhere<ref name=fx12_ve1_1279> The expression is used of the Āryan Pūrus in vii. 18, 13;<br> of the Paṇis in vii. 6, 3;<br> and of hostile persons in i. 174, 2;<br> v. 32, 8;<br> x. 23, 5. Roth, ''Erläuterungen zum [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],'' 97, thinks the sense is ‘of insulting speech,’ and Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 114, 115, strongly supports this view. But Hillebrandt, ''op. cit.,'' 1, 89, 90, 114, prefers to see in it ‘speaking an enemy's speech,’ and thinks that the Pūrus were dialectically different from the Bharatas--a view which can be supported from the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 1, 23, 24, where the Asuras say ''he'lavo'' (= ''he'rayo,'' ‘ho, enemies,’ in Sanskrit). See Muir, ''op. cit.,'' 2^2, 114;<br> Davidson, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 37, 23 (the Mahābhāṣya version);<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 31, n. 3. The word could thus apply to the Dasyus also, as the strange speech of the enemy could be either Āryan or aboriginal.</ref> applied to Āryans, its correct meaning is more probably ‘of hostile speech.’<br><br>[[दस्यु|Dasyu]] corresponds with the Iranian ''daṅhu, daqyu,'' which denotes a ‘province.’ Zimmer<ref name=fx13_ve1_1279> ''Op. cit.,'' 110 ''et seq.'' So Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 158.</ref> thinks that the original meaning was ‘enemy,’ whence the Iranians developed the sense of ‘hostile country,’ ‘conquered country,’ ‘province,’ while the Indians, retaining the signification of ‘enemy,’ extended it to include demon foes. Roth<ref name=fx14_ve1_1279> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> considers that the meaning of human enemy is a transfer from the strife of gods  and demons. Lassen<ref name=fx15_ve1_1279> ''Indische Alterthumskunde,'' 1^2, 633 ''et seq.'' This theory is now generally discredited. ''Cf.'' Justi, ''Go7ttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen,'' 1866, 1446 ''et seq.;<br>'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 142;<br> Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 162 ''et seq.;<br>'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 156.</ref> attempted to onnect the contrast ''daqyu: [[दस्यु|dasyu]]'' with that of ''daeva: deva,'' and to see in it a result of the religious differences which, according to Haug's theory, had separated the Iranians and the Indians. The word may have originally meant ‘ravaged land’<ref name=fx16_ve1_1279> Both this word and [[दास|Dāsa]] appear to be derived from the root ''das,'' which, according to Whitney, ''Roots,'' means ‘lay waste’;<br> but, according to Roth, ‘suffer want,’ ‘waste away.’</ref> as a result of invasion; hence ‘enemies’ country,' then ‘hostile people,’ who as human foes were more usually called by the cognate name of '''[[दास|Dāsa]].'''<br><br>Individual Dasyus are '''[[चुमुरि|Cumuri]], [[शम्बर|Śambara]], Śuṣṇa,''' etc.<br><br>In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx17_ve1_1279> vii. 18, where the descendants of [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] are called ''dasyūnāṃ bhūyiṣṭhāḥ;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],'' xv. 26, 7.</ref> the word has, as later,<ref name=fx18_ve1_1279> Manu, v. 131;<br> x. 32. 45;<br> Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 118.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''op. cit.,'' 3, 276 ''et seq.;<br>'' Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 101 ''et seq.''</ref> the sense of uncivilized peoples generally.

दाक्षायण
<u>'''Dākṣāyaṇa,'''</u> ‘descendant of Dakṣa.’ The Dākṣāyaṇas are mentioned in the Atharvaveda and the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_1280> Av. i. 35, 1, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 51, 52;<br> Kaṭha, cited by von Schroeder, ''Tūbinger Kaṭha-Handschriften,'' 36;<br> [[खिल|Khila]], iv. 7, 7, 8.</ref> as having given gold to '''Śatānīka.''' In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1280> vi. 7, 4, 2: ''[[दाक्षायण|dākṣāyaṇa]]-[[हस्त|hasta]],'' ‘goldenhande.’ Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 283, n. 2, seems unnecessarily doubtful as to this.</ref> the word is actually used to denote ‘gold.’ The Dākṣāyaṇas appear there<ref name=fx3_ve1_1280> ii. 4, 4, 6. ''Cf.'' Artareya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 40.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 224;<br> 4, 358;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 195;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 35;<br> Lévi, ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 138.</ref> as a race of princes who, because of performing a certain rite, prospered down to the time of the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] itself.

दात्यौह
<u>'''Dātyauha,'''</u> a ‘gallinule,’ is mentioned in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or horse sacrifice, in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1281> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 17, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 25. 39. Pāṇini, vii. 3. 1, derives the word from ''ditya-vah. Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 91.</ref> The  word is clearly a variant of ''dātyūha,'' which occurs in the epics and law books.

दात्र
<u>'''Dātra'''</u> (‘cutter’), denoting a ‘sickle,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1282> viii. 78, 10;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 1.</ref> Cows ‘with sickle-shaped marks on their ears’ (''[[दात्र|dātra]]-karṇyaḥ'') are referred to in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1282> iv. 2, 9.</ref> Otherwise the expression is only found later, occurring in the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] and epic literature.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1282> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 86.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 238.</ref> See also '''Sṛṇi.'''

दात्रेय
<u>'''Dātreya'''</u> is the patronymic of '''Arāḍa [[शौनक|Śaunaka]]''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1283> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373.</ref> Possibly [[दार्तेय|Dārteya]], ‘descendant of [[दृति|Dṛti]],’ should be read,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1283> ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> but the word may have the same derivation as the latter form with metathesis.

दाधीच
<u>'''Dādhīca,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Dadhyanc,'''’ is the patronymic of '''[[च्यवन|Cyavana]]''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiv. 6).<br>==Foot Notes==

दान
<u>'''1. Dāna,'''</u> ‘giving,’ ‘gift,’ is a word of frequent occurrence in the Rigveda, especially in the [[दान|Dāna]]-stutis<ref name=fx1_ve1_1285> The term seems first to occur in the Bṛhaddevatā, vi. 45, 92, and in similar works.</ref> (‘Praises of Gifts’) of generous patrons (see '''[[दक्षिणा|Dakṣiṇā]]'''). One of the characteristics of the '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]''' is his right to receive gifts, which it is obligatory on the other castes to present.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1285> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 7, 1;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 47-61.</ref> The gift of a daughter (''kanyāyā dānam'') was a form of marriage<ref name=fx3_ve1_1285> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 4.</ref> (see '''[[विवाह|Vivāha]]'''), because in it the girl was ‘given’ away by her father or brother.

दान
<u>'''2. Dāna'''</u> (‘distribution’)<ref name=fx1_ve1_1286> From ''dā,'' ‘divide.’</ref> seems in several passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1286> i. 55, 7;<br> 48, 4;<br> 180, 5;<br> viii. 46, 26;<br> 60, 8;<br> 99, 4, etc. ''Cf.,'' however, Pischel ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 100.</ref> to be a designation of the sacrificial feast to which  the god is invited (''cf.'' ). In one passage<ref name=fx3_ve1_1286> Rv. viii. 33, 8;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 5, 157.</ref> Sāyaṇa thinks that it denotes the ''mada-jalāni,'' ‘drops of water falling from the temples of a rutting elephant,’<ref name=fx4_ve1_1286> [[दान|Dāna]] in this sense, so common in the post-Vedic language, is probably derived from ''dā,'' ‘divide,’ meaning originally ‘secretion.’</ref> but this is doubtful. In another passage<ref name=fx5_ve1_1286> ii. 13, 7.</ref> Roth thinks that ‘pasture land’ is meant.

दान
<u>'''3. Dāna'''</u> is in three passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1287> v. 27, 5;<br> vii. 18, 23;<br> viii. 46, 24. But in all these cases ‘gifts’ seems an adequate version, ‘horses’ being understood.</ref> held by Roth to designate a chariot horse.

दामन्
<u>'''Dāman,'''</u> a ‘rope’ or ‘girdle,’<ref name=fx1_ve1_1288> Originally ‘bond,’ from ''dā,'' ‘bind.’</ref> is often mentioned in the Rigveda and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1288> Rv. i. 56, 3, etc.;<br> Av. vi. 63, 1;<br> 103, 2;<br> vii. 103, 1. 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 13, 1, etc.</ref> Reference is made to the rope of the sacrificial horse,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1288> Rv. i. 162, 8.</ref> as well as to the practice of tying calves with ropes.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1288> Rv. ii. 28, 7.</ref> The word occurs in the sense of a ‘band’ of horse hair in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx5_ve1_1288> v. 3, 1, 10. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 62, n. 2.</ref>

दाय
<u>'''Dāya'''</u> occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1289> x. 114, 10.</ref> only in the sense of ‘reward’ of exertion (''śrama''), but later it means ‘inheritance’--that is, a father's property which is to be divided among his sons either during his lifetime or after his death. The passages all negative the idea that the property of the family was legally family property: it is clear that it was the property of the head of the house, usually the father, and that the other members of the family only had moral claims upon it which the father could ignore, though he might be coerced by his sons if they were physically stronger.<br><br>Thus '''Manu''' is said in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_1289> iii. 1, 9, 4 ''et seq. Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 191-194;<br> Lévi, ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 67, 68.</ref> to have divided his property among his sons. He omitted '''[[नाभानेदिष्ठ|Nābhānediṣṭha]],'''  whom he afterwards taught how to appease the Aṅgirases, and to procure cows. This is a significant indication that the property he divided was movable property, rather than land ('''[[उर्वरा|Urvarā]]'''). In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1289> v. 14.</ref> the division is said to have been made during Manu's lifetime by his sons, who left only their aged father to [[नाभानेदिष्ठ|Nābhānediṣṭha]]. According to the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx4_ve1_1289> iii. 156 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 26, 61, 62).</ref> again, four sons divided the inheritance while their old father, Abhipratārin, was still alive. It is, of course, possible to regard [[दाय|Dāya]] as denoting the heritable property of the family, but the developed ''patria potestas'' of the father, which was early very marked, as shown by the legend of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]],''' is inconsistent with the view that the sons were legally owners with their father, unless and until. they actually insisted on a division of the property.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1289> The same question has been raised as to the origin of English or Teutonic property in land generally. Against any idea even of family ownership in a strict sense of the word, see Fustel de Coulanges, ''Recherches sur quelques Problèmes d'Histoire,'' 322 ''et seq.;<br>'' Ashley, in Fustel de Coulanges, ''Origin of Property in Land,'' xvi-xxi;<br> Pollock and Maitland, ''History of English Law,'' 2, 237 ''et seq.'' The older view, which accepted family and communal ownership, represented in different forms by Maine (''Village Communities in the East and West''), Stubbs, Green, and others, is defended in a new form by Vinogradoff, ''Villanage in England.'' See also Keith, ''Journal of the African Society,'' 6, 201 ''et seq.'' Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 93-96, does not accept the communal ownership of land, but, ''ibid.,'' 80, is inclined to believe in the joint ownership of a family. He admits that this is inconsistent with the strict rule of ''patria potestas,'' which still exists in Bengal;<br> Baden Powell, ''Village Communities in India,'' 133 ''et seq.,'' doubts the existence in early India of such a ''patria potestas.'' But the facts seem clearly to show that there was such a power, and that the father owned the property. His sons, as they grew up, came to claim the property, and he might have to divide it;<br> hence the idea naturally developed that every child on birth had a legal share in the property. No doubt also from the first the right to part with land was one which grown-up sons and the rest of the community could object to, once the village had acquired a fixed existence. This would account adequately for the later system. ''Cf.'' also pp. 100, n. 19;<br> 336, n. 7, and '''[[राजन्य|Rājanya]].'''</ref> Probably-there is no evidence of any decisive character--land was not divided at first, but no doubt its disposal began to follow the analogy of cattle and other movable property as soon as the available supply of arable land became limited.<br><br>As for the method of division, it is clear from the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx6_ve1_1289> ii. 5, 2, 7.</ref> that the elder son was usually preferred; perhaps  this was always the case after death. During the father's lifetime another might be preferred, as appears from a passage of the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx7_ve1_1289> xvi. 4, 4.</ref> Women were excluded from partition or inheritance, according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx8_ve1_1289> iv. 4, 2, 13.</ref> and the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]].<ref name=fx9_ve1_1289> iii. 4.</ref> They were, no doubt, supported by their brothers; but if they had none they might be reduced to prostitution.<ref name=fx10_ve1_1289> ''Cf.'' '''Ztrī.'''</ref> Detailed rules of inheritance appear in the Sūtras.<ref name=fx11_ve1_1289> Inheritance is also alluded to in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 17;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 27, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 2, 22;<br> iii. 2, 1, 18. For the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] rules, see Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 80 ''et seq.''</ref><br><br>The heir is called Dayada,<ref name=fx12_ve1_1289> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 4, 3, 9;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 4;<br> metaphorically, Av. v. 18, 6, 14.</ref> ‘receiver (''ā-da'') of inheritance.’

दार
<u>'''Dāra,'''</u> ‘wife,’ is found in the Sūtras (usually as a plural masculine), and once (as a singular) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1290> vi. 4, 12 (where ''dvāreṇa'' is a ''varia lectio;<br>'' see St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''). ''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 415, 416, who igneres the Bṛhadāraṇyaka passage.</ref>

दारु
<u>'''Dāru,'''</u> ‘wood,’ is frequently mentioned in the Rigveda and later,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1291> Rv. vi. 3, 4;<br> x. 145, 4, etc.;<br> Av. x. 4, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 8, 3, etc.</ref> denoting amongst other things the pole of a chariot,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1291> Rv. x. 102, 8.</ref> logs as fuel,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1291> Rv. viii. 102, 20.</ref> the wooden parts of a car,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1291> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 6, 2, 14.</ref> possibly wooden stocks,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1291> Av. vi. 121, 2. But this is doubtful. ''Cf.'' '''Tāya''' and '''[[द्रुपद|Drupada]].'''</ref> and so forth.

दार्ढ-जयन्ति
<u>'''Dārḍha-jayanti,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[दृढजयन्त|Dṛḍhajayanta]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''[[वैपश्चित|Vaipaścita]] [[गुप्त|Gupta]] [[लौहित्य|Lauhitya]]''' and of '''[[वैपश्चित|Vaipaścita]] [[दृढजयन्त|Dṛḍhajayanta]] [[लौहित्य|Lauhitya]]''' in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 42, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

दार्तेय
<u>'''Dārteya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[दृति|Dṛti]].'''’ The Dārteyas are mentioned as authorities on sacrificial matters in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1293> xxxi. 2 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 473).</ref> and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1293> xxv. 3, 6.</ref> 

दार्भ्य
<u>'''Dārbhya,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[दर्भ|Darbha]],’ is mentioned in a verse of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1294> v. 61, 17.</ref> Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_1294> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> identifies him with '''[[श्यावाश्व|Śyāvāśva]],''' but the Bṛhaddevatā<ref name=fx3_ve1_1294> v. 50. 77.</ref> with '''Rathavīti.''' The same patronymic is frequently<ref name=fx4_ve1_1294> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 2, 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 4, 12;<br> 6, 5;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 4. ''Cf.'' Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 62, n. 2.</ref> connected with '''[[केशिन्|Keśin]],''' and is also applied to '''Rathaprota.'''<ref name=fx5_ve1_1294> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 3.</ref> See also '''[[दाल्भ्य|Dālbhya]].'''

दार्व्-आघात
<u>'''Dārv-āghāta,'''</u> the ‘woodpecker,’ is included in the list of sacrificial victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or ‘horse sacrifice,’ in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1295> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 15, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 16;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 35. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 92.</ref>

दार्व्-आहार
<u>'''Dārv-āhāra,'''</u> a ‘gatherer of wood,’ is included in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha, or ‘human sacrifice,’ in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1296> Vājasaneyī Saṃhitā, xxx. 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 8, 1.</ref>

दाल्भि
<u>'''Dālbhi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Dalbha,’ is the patronymic of '''Vaka''' in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā (x. 6).<br>==Foot Notes==

दाल्भ्य
<u>'''Dālbhya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Dalbha,’ is a variant of '''[[दार्भ्य|Dārbhya]].''' It is the patronymic of (''a'') '''[[केशिन्|Keśin]]''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]];<ref name=fx1_ve1_1298> xiii. 10, 8. ''Cf.'' the [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]], reported by Ṣaḍguruśiṣya (Sarvānukramaṇī, ed. Macdonell, 118). The St. Petersburg Dictionary quotes the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 4, for [[दाल्भ्य|Dālbhya]] (but also for [[दार्भ्य|Dārbhya]], which is the reading of Lindner's edition).</ref> (''b'') '''[[चैकितायन|Caikitāyana]]''' in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1298> i. 8, 1.</ref> and the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]];<ref name=fx3_ve1_1298> i. 38, 1;<br> 56, 3.</ref> (''c'') '''Vaka''' in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_1298> i. 2, 13;<br> 12, 1, 3.</ref> and the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1298> xxx. 2, where [[दाल्भ्य|Dālbhya]] is read, not [[दाल्भि|Dālbhi]], as stated in the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' The Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitā, xlvi. 5, has ''Darbhasya.'' [[दाल्भि|Dālbhi]] is found, however, in [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, x. 6.</ref> 

दाव
<u>'''Dāva,'''</u> ‘forest fire,’ is mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1299> vii. 45, 2.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1299> xi. 2, 7, 32.</ref> In the latter work such fires are referred to as occurring in spring. According to Sieg,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1299> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 44 ''et seq.''</ref> a hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_1299> x. 142. Sieg's interpretation of this hymn is not at all probable.</ref> describes a forest fire. Watchers were employed to guard against surprise from such conflagrations (''[[दाव|dāva]]-pa'').<ref name=fx5_ve1_1299> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 16;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 11, 1.</ref>

दाव-सु आङ्गिरस
<u>'''Dāva-su Āṅgirasa,'''</u> a seer of Sāmans, or chants, is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1300> xxv. 5, 12, 14. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 160.</ref>

दाश
<u>'''Dāśa,'''</u> ‘fisherman,’ is mentioned in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha, or ‘human sacrifice,’ in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1301> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 16;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 12, 1. Weber, ''Indische Streifen'' 1, 81, renders the word by ''Fischerknecht,'' perhaps regarding it as equivalent to ''[[दास|dāsa]],'' ‘servant.’ ''Cf.'' Manu, x. 34;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' [[दाश|Dāśa]], 2. 3.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[धैवर|Dhaivara]].'''

दाशतय
<u>'''Dāśataya,'''</u> ‘belonging to the (Rigveda text) divided into ten (books),’ is an epithet of Adhyāya, ‘section,’ in the [[निदान|Nidāna]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1302> ii. 11 (''Indische Studien,'' 1, 45)</ref> The feminine form of the word is also found in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1302> viii. 7.</ref> and later<ref name=fx3_ve1_1302> [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]] Prātiśākhya, xvi. 54;<br> xvii. 30;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 2, 16, 22, etc.;<br> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxvi. 13;<br> xxvii. 4, etc.</ref>

दाश-राज्ञ
<u>'''Dāśa-rājña'''</u> is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1303> vii. 33, 2, 5;<br> 83, 8.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1303> x. 128, 12.</ref> of '''Sudās'''' famous ‘battle with the ten kings.’ It is somewhat difficult to make out exactly who the kings were (see '''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]]'''), but the number is probably a round one, and cannot be pressed. The actual battle hymn<ref name=fx3_ve1_1303> 8, 18</ref> does not contain  the word, and the passages in which it is found may reasonably be considered late.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1303> ''Cf.'' for the late date of vii. 33, Bergaigne, ''L'histoire de la Saṃhita,'' 38, 72;<br> Oldenberg, ''Prolegomena,'' 198, 200, 265, n. 1;<br> Arnold, ''Vedic Metre,'' 309;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 130, opposes this view, but not convincingly.</ref>

दाशर्म
<u>'''Dāśarma'''</u> appears in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1304> vii. 6. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 472.</ref> as a teacher and a contemporary of '''[[आरुणि|Āruṇi]].'''

दास
<u>'''Dāsa,'''</u> like '''[[दस्यु|Dasyu]],''' sometimes denotes enemies of a demoniac character in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1305> ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 157.</ref> but in many passages<ref name=fx2_ve1_1305> ''Cf.'' Rv. v. 34, 6;<br> vi. 22, 10;<br> 33, 3;<br> 50, 6;<br> vii. 83, 1;<br> x. 38, 3;<br> 69, 6;<br> 3, 1;<br> Av. v. 11, 3.</ref> the word refers to human foes of the Āryans. The Dāsas are described as having forts (''puraḥ''),<ref name=fx3_ve1_1305> ii. 20, 8 (called ''āyasīḥ,'' ‘made of iron’);<br> i. 103, 3;<br> iii. 12, 6;<br> iv. 32, 10. They are called ''śāradīḥ,'' ‘autumnal,’ in 1. 131, 4;<br> 174, 2;<br> vi. 20, 10. ''Cf.'' also ''dehyaḥ,'' ‘ramparts,’ in vi. 47, 2.</ref> and their clans (''viśaḥ'') are mentioned.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1305> ii. 11, 4;<br> iv. 28, 4;<br> vi. 25, 2.</ref> It is possible that the forts, which are called ‘autumnal’ (''śaradīḥ''),<ref name=fx5_ve1_1305> ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 60.</ref> may be mythical, but it is not essential, for the epithet may allude to their being resorted to in the autumn season. The [[दास|Dāsa]] colour ('''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]]''')<ref name=fx6_ve1_1305> ii. 12, 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 25, 6. ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 101, 1;<br> 130, 8;<br> ii. 20, 7;<br> iv. 16, 13;<br> vi. 47, 21;<br> vii. 5, 3. The [[आर्य|Ārya]] colour is mentioned in iii. 34, 9, and the [[दास|Dāsa]] is contrasted with the [[वर्ण|Varṇa]] (of the singers) in i. 104, 2. The ‘white-hued (''śvitnya'') friends’ who, in i. 100, 18, aid in the conquest of the [[दस्यु|Dasyu]] and Siṃyu are doubtless Āryans. In the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 30, the day and night (''ahorātre'') are paralleled with the Śūdrāryau--that is, probably with the Āryan and [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] (the compound is not to be taken as giving the words in the correct order;<br> ''cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' 268). See also Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 140;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 10, 11.</ref> is probably an allusion to the black skin of the aborigines, which is also directly mentioned.<ref name=fx7_ve1_1305> ''kṛṣṇā tvac,'' ‘black skin,’ i. 130, 8;<br> ix. 41, 1.</ref> The aborigines (as Dasyus) are called ''[[अनास्|anās]],'' ‘noseless’(?),<ref name=fx8_ve1_1305> ''Cf.'' '''[[दस्यु|Dasyu]],''' notes 6, 7.</ref> and ''[[मृध्र-वाच्|mṛdhra-vāc]],'' ‘of hostile speech,’<ref name=fx9_ve1_1305> v. 29, 10. See '''[[दस्यु|Dasyu]];<br>''' Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 138.</ref> and are probably meant by the phallus-worshippers (''śiśna-devāḥ,'' ‘whose deity is a phallus’) of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx10_ve1_1305> vii. 21, 5;<br> x. 99, 3. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''op. cit.,'' p. 155.</ref> It is significant that constant  reference is made to the differences in religion between Ārva and [[दास|Dāsa]] or [[दस्यु|Dasyu]].<ref name=fx11_ve1_1305> Rv. i. 33, 4. 5;<br> iv. 16, 9;<br> v. 7, 10;<br> 42, 9;<br> vi. 14, 3;<br> viii. 70, 10;<br> x. 22, 7. 8, etc.</ref><br><br>Since the Dāsas were in many cases reduced to slavery, the word [[दास|Dāsa]] has the sense of ‘slave’ in several passages of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx12_ve1_1305> vii. 86, 7;<br> viii. 56, 3;<br> x. 62, 10. Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' 2, suggests that in viii. 46, 32, the word ''dāsān,'' ‘slaves,’ should be read in place of ''dāse,'' qualifying '''[[बल्बूथ|Balbūtha]].''' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 117, quotes the passage to indicate the admixture of Āryan and [[दास|Dāsa]] blood. See also Av. iv. 9, 8;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vii. 24, 2. It is uncertain whether ''[[दास|dāsa]]-pravarga,'' as an epithet of ''rayi,'' ‘wealth,’ in Rv. i. 92, 8, means ‘consisting of troops of slaves.’ Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 82, so takes the expression in i. 158, 5.</ref> Dāsī, the feminine, always has this sense from the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx13_ve1_1305> Av. v. 22, 6;<br> xii. 3, 13;<br> 4, 9;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 13, 2;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 10 (Mādhyaṃdina = 2, 7 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]). Zimmer, 107, sees this sense in ''[[वधू|vadhū]]'' in Rv. viii. 19, 36. See also '''Vadhūmant.'''</ref> onwards. Aboriginal women were, no doubt, the usual slaves, for on their husbands being slain in battle they would naturally have been taken as servants. They would sometimes also become concubines; thus '''[[कवष|Kavaṣa]]''' was taunted with being the son of a female slave (''dāsyāḥ putraḥ'') in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx14_ve1_1305> ii. 19;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 3.</ref><br><br>Ludwig<ref name=fx15_ve1_1305> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 209.</ref> considers that in some passages<ref name=fx16_ve1_1305> See i. 158, 5;<br> ii. 13, 8;<br> iv. 30, 14. 15;<br> vi. 20, 10;<br> vii. 99, 5;<br> x. 49, 6, 7. None of these passages need certainly be so taken.</ref> [[दास|Dāsa]] is applied, in the sense of ‘enemy,’ to Āryan foes, but this is uncertain. Zimmer<ref name=fx17_ve1_1305> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 110 ''et seq.''</ref> and Meyer<ref name=fx18_ve1_1305> ''Geschichte des Altertums,'' 1, 515.</ref> think that [[दास|Dāsa]]<ref name=fx19_ve1_1305> If derived from ''das'' in the sense of ‘lay waste’ (Whitney, ''Roots''), the original meaning would have been ‘devastator,’ ‘ravager.’</ref> originally meant ‘enemy’ in general, later developing in Iran into the name of the Dahae<ref name=fx20_ve1_1305> The Dahae may have been closely allied in race and language with the Iranians, but this is not very clearly proved. ''Cf.'' E. Kuhn in Kuhn's ''Zeitschrift,'' 28, 214;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 95. The possibility or probability of mixture with Mongolian blood is always present. So Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 112, calls the Daoi or Daai of Herodotus, i. 126, a Turanian tribe.</ref> of the Caspian steppes, and in India into a designation of the aborigines. On the other hand, Hillebrandt<ref name=fx21_ve1_1305> ''Op. cit.,'' 1, 94.</ref> argues that, as the Dāsas and the Paṇis are mentioned together,<ref name=fx22_ve1_1305> Rv. v. 34, 6. 7;<br> vii. 6, 3 ([[दस्यु|Dasyu]] and [[पणि|Paṇi]] together);<br> Av. v. 11, 6.</ref> they must be deemed to be closely related tribes, identifying  the Paṇis with the Parnians and the Dāsas of the Rigveda with the Dahae. This view, of course, necessitates a transfer of the scenes of the Rigveda, where Dāsas are prominent, and especially those in which Divodāsa--‘the heavenly Dāsa’--plays an important part,<ref name=fx23_ve1_1305> ''Op. cit.,'' 1, 96 ''et seq.,'' He argues that [[दास|Dāsa]] occurs only four times in Maṇḍala vii., but eight times in vi., and that similarly [[शम्बर|Śambara]], the [[दास|Dāsa]], is mentioned six times in vi., but only twice in vii. But Divodāsa much more probably means, as Oldenberg interprets the name, ‘the servant of heaven.’ See his ''Religion des Veda,'' 155, n. 1;<br> Bergaigne, ''Religion Védique,'' 2, 209;<br> below, p. 363, n. 11.</ref> to the far west. Hillebrandt justifies this by regarding the scene of the sixth book of the Rigveda as quite different from that of the seventh and third, in which [[सुदास्|Sudās]], the Bharatas, [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]], and [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] appear. The [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] of the sixth book he locates in Arachosia, that of the seventh in the ‘Middle Country.’ It is, however, extremely doubtful whether this theory can be upheld. That Divodāsa should have been a [[दास|Dāsa]], and yet have fought against other Dāsas, is not in itself likely, especially when his son [[सुदास्|Sudās]] appears as a protagonist of Āryan civilization. It also seems unreasonable to seek in Arachosia for the river '''Sarasvati,''' which it is natural to locate in the ‘Middle Country.’<br><br>The wealth of the Dāsas was no doubt considerable,<ref name=fx24_ve1_1305> ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 176, 4;<br> iv. 30, 13;<br> viii. 40, 6;<br> x. 69. 5;<br> Av. vii. 90, 2.</ref> but in civilization there is no reason to suppose that they were ever equal to the invaders.<ref name=fx25_ve1_1305> ''Cf.'' Rv. ii. 12, 11;<br> iv. 30. 14;<br> vi. 26, 5, whence it appears that the Dāsas were often dwellers in mountains, a natural refuge for beaten tribes.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 269-275, 368;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 207-213;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 101-118;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 35 (who derives ''[[दास|dāsa]]'' from ''dā,'' ‘bind’), 254;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 2, 359 ''et seq.;<br>'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 96.</ref> Leading Dāsas were '''Ilībiśa, [[चुमुरि|Cumuri]]''' and '''[[धुनि|Dhuni]], [[पिप्रु|Pipru]], [[वर्चिन्|Varcin]], [[शम्बर|Śambara]].''' For names of aboriginal tribes, see '''[[किरात|Kirāta]], [[कीकट|Kīkaṭa]], [[चण्डाल|Caṇḍāla]], [[पर्णक|Parṇaka]], Śiṃyu.'''

दास-वेश
<u>'''Dāsa-veśa,'''</u> occurring only once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1306> ii. 13, 8. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 209.</ref> probably designates a [[दास|Dāsa]] named '''[[वेश|Veśa]].''' Sāyaṇa's interpretation of the word as ‘destruction of foes’ can hardly be correct. 

दास्य
<u>'''Dāsya'''</u> occurs once in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iv. 2. 30 Mādhyaṃdina = 23 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]) in the sense of ‘slavery.’<br>==Foot Notes==

दित्य-वाह्
<u>'''Ditya-vāh,'''</u> m.; '''Dityauhī,''' f., ‘a two-year-old bull or cow.’ is mentioned in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmanas.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1308> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 3, 1;<br> v. 6, 15, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiv. 10;<br> xviii. 26;<br> xxviii. 25;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxi. 1, etc.</ref>

दिद्यु
<u>'''Didyu, Didyut,'''</u> both<ref name=fx1_ve1_1309> [[दिद्यु|Didyu]]: i. 71, 5, iv. 41, 4;<br> vii. 56, 9;<br> 85, 2, etc.;<br> Av. i. 2, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ii. 20;<br> x. 17, etc. Didyut: Rv. i. 66, 7;<br> v. 86, 3;<br> vii. 25, 1, etc.;<br> certainly divine in ii. 13, 7.</ref> denote in the Rigveda ‘missile,’ ‘arrow,’ whether divine or human.

दिधिषु
<u>'''Didhiṣu'''</u> in the Rigveda denotes a ‘wooer.’ It is applied<ref name=fx1_ve1_1310> x. 18, 18 = Av. xviii. 3, 2 (where ''didhiṣus'' is merely a bad reading) = [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, vi. 1, 3.</ref> to the relative, probably brother-in-law,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1310> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 2, 18, where are mentioned the brother-in-law (''[[देवृ|devṛ]]''), a representative of the husband (there is nothing to show whether he is identical with the preceding or not), a pupil, or an aged servant (''jarad-[[दास|dāsa]]'').</ref> who takes the place of the husband at the funeral rite, and who, as in the Hebraic levirate, is to beget a child by the brother's wife if there is no son.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1310> ''Cf.'' Rv. x. 40, 2;<br> Kaegi, ''Der Rigveda,'' n. 51.</ref> Hillebrandt<ref name=fx4_ve1_1310> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 40, 708 ''et seq.''</ref> and Lanman<ref name=fx5_ve1_1310> ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 385.</ref> consider that the word originally meant only ‘wooer,’ and applied to the king who, after the chief queen had lain beside the dead victim in the Puruṣamedha or ‘human sacrifice,’ claimed her again; but this view is hardly plausible.<ref name=fx6_ve1_1310> See Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 848, 849;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1907, 946.</ref> The term is also applied to the god Pūṣan<ref name=fx7_ve1_1310> vi. 55, 5.</ref> as the wooer of his mother, apparently Sūryā.<ref name=fx8_ve1_1310> ''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 21;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 35.<br><br>''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Rigveda, Kommentar,'' 154.</ref>

दिधिषू-पति
<u>'''Didhiṣū-pati'''</u> occurs in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1311> xxxi. 7, quoted in Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 579.</ref> and Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1311> xlvii. 7, quoted ''ibid.,'' 579, 580.</ref> as well as in the Āpastamba,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1311> ii. 5, 12, 22.</ref> [[गौतम|Gautama]],<ref name=fx4_ve1_1311> xv. 16.</ref> and [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]]  [[धर्म|Dharma]] Sūtras,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1311> i. 18;<br> xx. 7 ''et seq.''</ref> in lists of people who have committed sin (''enas''). The traditional rendering<ref name=fx6_ve1_1311> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. [[दिधिषु|didhiṣu]],'' 3.</ref> is ‘husband of a woman married a second time’; Manu<ref name=fx7_ve1_1311> iii. 173.</ref> seems to apply the term to the brother-in-law who is ‘married’ to his sister-in-law after his brother's death for the purpose of begetting a child, if he displays conjugal affection to her (''anurajyate kāmataḥ'').<ref name=fx8_ve1_1311> ''Cf.'' Leist, ''Altarisches Jus Gentium,'' 106.</ref> This sense would be possible, since '''[[दिधिषु|Didhiṣu]]''' denotes a ‘wooer,’ and a widow could be regarded as a ‘wooer’ when able to control her own choice of a spouse. But another tradition<ref name=fx9_ve1_1311> Laugākṣi, quoted by Kullūka on Manu, iii. 160;<br> Commentary on Āpastamba, ''loc. cit.''</ref> holds that Didhiṣū means the elder sister whose younger sister has married before her. This view is supported by a passage in the [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx10_ve1_1311> xx. 7 ''et seq.''</ref> and by the use of the word ''agredidhiṣū-pati,''<ref name=fx11_ve1_1311> ''Cf. agre-[[दिधिषु|didhiṣu]],'' ‘one who woos (a younger sister) before (her elder sister is married),’ in Āpastamba, ''loc. cit.;<br>'' [[गौतम|Gautama]], xv. 16;<br> [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]], i. 18;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]], ''loc. cit.;<br> agre-dadhus,'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 9;<br> ''agre-dadhiṣu,'' Kapiṣṭhala, ''loc. cit.;<br> agra-[[दिधिषु|didhiṣu]],'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 8, 11.</ref> which must mean the ‘husband of a younger sister married before the elder.’ In this case also Didhiṣū would mean ‘wooer,’ the elder sister being so called because, if her parents do not arrange a marriage for her, she is, according to Viṣṇu,<ref name=fx12_ve1_1311> Viṣṇu [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxiv. 40.<br><br>''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''op. cit.,'' 579-586.</ref> to make her own choice of a husband (''kuryāt svayaṃvaram''). See also '''[[एदिधिषुःपति|Edidhiṣuḥpati]]''' and '''[[दैधिषव्य|Daidhiṣavya]].'''

दिव्
<u>'''Div,'''</u> ‘sky.’ The world as a whole is regarded as divided into the three domains of ‘earth,’ ‘air’ or ‘atmosphere,’ and ‘heaven’ or ‘sky’ (''div''),<ref name=fx1_ve1_1312> Rv. ii. 40;<br> viii. 6, 15;<br> 10, 6;<br> 90, 6, etc.</ref> or alternatively into ‘heaven and earth’ (''dyāvā-[[पृथिवी|pṛthivī]]''),<ref name=fx2_ve1_1312> Rv. i. 143, 2;<br> 159, 1;<br> 160, 1;<br> iv. 14, 2, etc.;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 8, 3, 9;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vii. 4, 2;<br> viii. 1, 3. In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 1, 2, and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, vii. 3, it is said that when heavy and constant rain falls people say. ‘Heaven and earth have united.’</ref> which two are then considered as comprising the universe, the atmosphere being included in the sky. Lightning, wind, and rain belong to the atmosphere, solar and  similar phenomena to the sky. In some passages<ref name=fx3_ve1_1312> Av. iv. 14, 3 = Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvii. 67.</ref> the vault (''[[नाक|nāka]]'') of the sky is added after the usual triad, and before the celestial light (''svar, jyotis'').<br><br>The threefold division of the universe is reflected in a threefold division of the three elements--earth, air, and sky. Thus a highest (''uttama,''<ref name=fx4_ve1_1312> Rv. v. 60, 6.</ref> ''uttara,''<ref name=fx5_ve1_1312> Rv. iv. 26, 6.</ref> ''pārya''<ref name=fx6_ve1_1312> Rv. vi. 40, 5. In Rv. v. 4, 3, it is called ''tṛtīya.''</ref> ), a middle, and a lowest heaven are specified.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1312/> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx7_ve1_1312> xviii. 2, 48.</ref> the three heavens are distinguished as ‘rich in water’ (''udanvatī''), as ''[[पीलुमती|pīlumatī]]'' (of uncertain meaning), and as the ''pradyaus,'' where the Fathers sit. Heaven is frequently called ''vyoman'' as well as ''rocana''<ref name=fx8_ve1_1312> ''Trīṇi'' or ''trī rocanā,'' Rv. i. 102, 8;<br> 149, 4;<br> v. 69, 1, etc.</ref> (properly the ‘luminous space’ of heaven), and the dividing firmament which separates the visible upper world from the highest heaven is called, besides ''[[नाक|nāka]],'' ‘vault,’ ''sānu,'' ‘summit,’ ''viṣṭap,'' ‘surface,’ and ''pṛṣṭha,'' ‘ridge,’ and even ‘ridge of the vault,’<ref name=fx9_ve1_1312> Rv. i. 125, 5. ''Cf.'' iii. 2, 12.</ref> or ‘summit of the vault.’<ref name=fx10_ve1_1312> Rv. viii. 103, 2. ''Cf.'' also ix. 86, 27.</ref><br><br>Similarly three atmospheres (''[[रजस्|rajas]]''), or oftener two, are alluded to,<ref name=fx11_ve1_1312> Rv. iv. 53, 5;<br> v. 69, 1. ''Cf.'' also the references to the ‘highest’ atmosphere, ''uttama,'' ix. 22, 5;<br> ''parama,'' iii. 30, 2;<br> ''tṛtīya,'' ix. 74, 6;<br> x. 45, 3;<br> 123, 8. The ‘lower’ (''[[उपर|upara]]'') or ‘terrestrial’ (''pārthiva'') is contrasted with the ‘heavenly’ (''[[दिव्य|divya]]'') space. See i. 62, 5;<br> iv. 53, 3.</ref> but the division here is merely artificial. In one passage<ref name=fx12_ve1_1312> Rv. i. 164, 6. ''Cf.'' vii. 87, 5.</ref> six ''rajāṃsi,'' ‘regions,’ are referred to, the heavens and the earths no doubt being meant. The usual name for the atmosphere is ''antarikṣa.''<br><br>The three earths are equally artificial, the origin of the triad being probably the use of ''[[पृथिवी|pṛthivī]]'' in the plural<ref name=fx13_ve1_1312> Rv. i. 188, 9. 10;<br> vii. 104, 11.</ref> to denote the three divisions of the universe (just as ''pitarau,'' ‘two fathers,’ denotes ‘father and mother’).<ref name=fx14_ve1_1312> ''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Altindische Syntax,'' p. 98;<br> Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Grammar,'' 183''c'' (p. 158).</ref> The earth is called ''kṣam, kṣā, gmā,'' or designated by the epithets ''mahī,'' ‘the great,’ ''[[पृथिवी|pṛthivī]]'' or ''urvī,'' ‘the broad,’ ''uttānā,'' ‘the extended,’ and is regularly contrasted as ''idam,'' ‘this world here,’ with the upper sphere.<ref name=fx15_ve1_1312> Rv. i. 22, 17;<br> 154, 1. 3;<br> and regularly in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.</ref>  The shape of the earth is compared with a wheel in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx16_ve1_1312> x. 89, 4. On the other hand, the earth is regarded as ''catur-bhṛṣṭi,'' ‘four-cornered,’ in Rv. x. 58, 3.</ref> and is expressly called ‘circular’ (''pari-maṇḍala'') in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx17_ve1_1312> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 9.</ref> When earth is conjoined with heaven, the two are conceived as great bowls (''camvā'') turned towards each other.<ref name=fx18_ve1_1312> Rv. iii. 55, 20.</ref> In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx19_ve1_1312> iii. 1, 2;<br> Śāṅkhāvana Āraṇyaka, vii. 3.</ref> the two are regarded as halves of an egg. The distance of heaven from the earth is given by the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx20_ve1_1312> x. 8, 18 = xiii. 2, 38;<br> 3, 14.</ref> as a thousand days' journey for the sun-bird, by the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx21_ve1_1312> ii. 17. ''Cf.'' '''[[आश्विन|Āśvina]].'''</ref> as a thousand days' journey for a horse, while the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx22_ve1_1312> xvi. 8, 6;<br> in xxi. 1, 9, with the alternatives of 1,000 days of the journey of a horse, or of the sun, or 1,000 leagues.</ref> whimsically estimates the distance as equivalent to a thousand cows standing one on the top of the other.<br><br>According to Zimmer,<ref name=fx23_ve1_1312> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 357, 358.</ref> the Vedic poets conceived the atmosphere to be above the earth in its upper division only, but below it in its lower stratum. The evidence,<ref name=fx24_ve1_1312> Rv. v. 81, 4;<br> vi. 9, 1;<br> vii. 80, 1.</ref> however, for the latter assumption is quite insufficient.<ref name=fx25_ve1_1312> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 10.</ref> The theory of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx26_ve1_1312> iii. 44, 4. Speyer's interpretation of this passage, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1906, 723-727, is anticipated and supplemented by Macdonell, ''loc. cit.''</ref> is that the sun merely reverses its bright side at night, turning its light on the stars and the moon while it retraverses its course to the east; and it has been shown<ref name=fx25_ve1_1312/> that this is probably the doctrine of the Rigveda also.<ref name=fx27_ve1_1312> i. 115, 5;<br> x. 37, 3.</ref> literature. The Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] See also '''[[सूर्य|Sūrya]]''' and '''Candramās.''' For the Vedic knowledge of the planets, see '''[[ग्रह|Graha]].'''<br><br>There is no geographical division of the earth in Vedic literature. The Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx28_ve1_1312> iv. 26, 12. ''Cf.'' [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 10, 16;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 31, n. 2. ''Cf.'' Bergaigne, ''Religion Vedique,'' 1, 1-3;<br> Wallis, ''Cosmology of the Rigveda,'' 111-117;<br> Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 357-359;<br> Macdonell, ''op. cit.,'' pp. 8-11;<br> Thibaut. ''Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik,'' 5, 6;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 358-364.</ref> states that the centre of the earth is a span north of the '''[[प्लक्ष|Plakṣa]] Prāsravaṇā,''' and that the centre of the sky is the constellation of the seven [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]], the Great Bear. For the quarters, see '''[[दिश्|Diś]].''' 

दिवोदास अतिथिग्व
<u>'''Divodāsa Atithigva'''</u> is one of the leading princes of the early Vedic age. He was a son of [[वध्र्य्अश्व|Vadhryaśva]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1313> Rv. vi. 61, 1.</ref> and father, or more probably grandfather, of '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]],''' the famous king of the '''[[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]]''' family, among the '''Bharatas.''' Probably [[पिजवन|Pijavana]] was the son and [[सुदास्|Sudās]] the grandson. Divodāsa was naturally a '''[[भरत|Bharata]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1313> Rv. vi. 16, 4, 5, 19. For [[सुदास्|Sudās]] as his descendant, see vii. 18, 25, with verse 23, where [[पैजवन|Paijavana]] is an epithet of [[सुदास्|Sudās]].</ref> and, like [[सुदास्|Sudās]], was an opponent of the '''Turvaśas''' and '''Yadus.'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1313> As [[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]], Rv. vii. 19, 8;<br> as Divodāsa, ix. 61, 2.</ref> His great enemy was '''[[शम्बर|Śambara]],''' the '''[[दास|Dāsa]],''' who was apparently chief of a mountain people,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1313> Rv. i. 130, 7;<br> ii. 12, 11;<br> vi. 26, 5;<br> vii. 18, 20. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 161.</ref> and whom he repeatedly defeated.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1313> See Rv. i. 112, 14;<br> 116, 18;<br> 119, 4;<br> 130, 7-10;<br> ii. 19, 6;<br> iv. 26, 3;<br> 30, 20;<br> vi. 26, 3. 5;<br> 43, 1;<br> 47, 21. 22;<br> ix. 61, 2.</ref> He was also, it seems, like his father [[वध्र्य्अश्व|Vadhryaśva]],<ref name=fx6_ve1_1313> Rv. x. 69, 1 ''et seq. Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 176;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologic,'' 1, 96, n. 2.</ref> an energetic supporter of the fire ritual, for Agni is once called by his name in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx7_ve1_1313> Daivodāsa, ‘worshipped by Divodāsa’;<br> viii. 103, 2. ''Cf.'' vi. 16, 5. 19;<br> 31, 1. For the defeat by Indra, ''cf.'' Rv. i. 53, 10;<br> ii. 14, 7;<br> vi. 18, 13;<br> viii. 64, 2;<br> Bergaigne, ''Religion Védique,'' 2, 337, 344.</ref> On the other hand, he was defeated, with '''[[आयु|Āyu]]''' and '''[[कुत्स|Kutsa]],''' by Indra's aid. In several passages he seems closely connected with the singer family, the '''Bharadvājas.'''<ref name=fx8_ve1_1313> ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 112, 13, 14;<br> 116, 18;<br> vi. 16, 5;<br> 31, 4;<br> 47, 22 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xv. 3, 7;<br> Hillebrandt, ''op. cit.,'' 1, 104.</ref><br><br>From one passage,<ref name=fx9_ve1_1313> vi. 61, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> where Divodāsa is said to have fought against the '''Paṇis,''' the '''Pārāvatas,''' and '''[[बृसय|Bṛsaya]],''' Hillebrandt<ref name=fx10_ve1_1313> ''Op. cit.,'' 1, 97 ''et seq.''</ref> has inferred that he was engaged in conflicts with the tribes of Arachosia, and interpreting the name as the ‘heavenly Dāsa’<ref name=fx11_ve1_1313> This is very improbable. See Bergaigne, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 209;<br> Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 155;<br> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 49, 175;<br> 51, 272.</ref> conjectures that he was himself a [[दास|Dāsa]]. This conclusion is not probable, for the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]''' on which the battle in question took place, and which can hardly be the Haraqaiti of Arachosia, would naturally designate the later [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]], while the Pārāvatas are mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx12_ve1_1313> ix. 4, 11. See '''[[पारावत|Pārāvata]].'''</ref> as in the east, about the '''[[यमुना|Yamunā]].''' Bergaigne's  opinion<ref name=fx13_ve1_1313> ''Op. cit.,'' 2, 342 ''et seq.''</ref> that Divodāsa and [[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]] were different people cannot be supported in view of the complete parallelism in the acts of the two persons.<ref name=fx14_ve1_1313> Compare, ''e.g.,'' vii. 19, 8, with ix. 61, 2 (opposed to [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] and Yadu);<br> i. 51, 6;<br> vi. 26, 3, with ii. 19, 6;<br> vi. 31, 4 (defeat of [[शम्बर|Śambara]]);<br> and see Hillebrandt, ''op. cit.,'' 3, 268;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 210 ''et seq.;<br>'' Macdonell, ''op. cit.,'' p. 161.</ref> See also '''[[प्रतर्दन|Pratardana]].'''<br><br>The people of Divodāsa are referred to in a hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx15_ve1_1313> i. 130, 10 (one of the series attributed to [[परुच्छेप|Parucchepa]]).<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 126;<br> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 406;<br> Ludwig, ''op. cit.,'' 3, 114, 176;<br> Grierson, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 604, 837;<br> Keith, ''ibid.,'' 831 ''et seq.;<br>'' 1138 ''et seq.'' Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' distinguishes two Divodāsas, one being the ancestor or father of [[सुदास्|Sudās]], the other the enemy of [[शम्बर|Śambara]]. Divodāsa is not mentioned in Maṇḍalas, iii, v. viii, x.</ref>

दिवो-दास भैम-सेनि
<u>'''Divo-[[दास|dāsa]] Bhaima-seni'''</u> (‘descendant of Bhīmasena’) is mentioned in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1314> vii. 1, 8. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 472.</ref> as a contemporary of '''[[आरुणि|Āruṇi]].'''

दिव्य
<u>'''Divya,'''</u> ‘ordeal,’ is a term not found until the later literature, but several references to the practice of ordeals have been seen in Vedic literature. The fire ordeal seen in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1315> ii. 12.</ref> by Schlagintweit,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1315> ''Die Gottesurtheile der Indier,'' 13 ''et seq.''</ref> Weber,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1315> ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 168.</ref> Ludwig,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1315> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 445.</ref> Zimmer,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1315> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 184.</ref> and others, has been disproved by Grill,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1315> ''Hundert Lieder,''^2 45, 87.</ref> Bloomfield,<ref name=fx7_ve1_1315> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, ccxxi;<br> ''American Journal of Philology,'' 11, 334, 335;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 294.</ref> and Whitney.<ref name=fx8_ve1_1315> Translation of the Atharvaveda. 54.</ref> But such an ordeal appears in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx9_ve1_1315> xiv. 6, 6.</ref> and an ordeal with a glowing axe<ref name=fx10_ve1_1315> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 16.</ref> occurs in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] as applied in an accusation of theft. Geldner<ref name=fx11_ve1_1315> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 150.</ref> suggests that this usage is referred to even in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx12_ve1_1315> iii. 53, 22.</ref> but this is most improbable.<ref name=fx13_ve1_1315> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 254.</ref> Ludwig<ref name=fx14_ve1_1315> ''Op. cit.,'' 4, 44.</ref> and Griffith<ref name=fx15_ve1_1315> ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 210.</ref> discover in another  passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx16_ve1_1315> i. 158, 4 ''et seq.''</ref> references to '''Dīrghatamas'''' having been subjected to the fire and water ordeals, but this view cannot be supported. According to Weber,<ref name=fx17_ve1_1315> ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 21;<br> 2, 363.</ref> the ‘balance’ ordeal is referred to in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx18_ve1_1315> xi. 2, 7, 33.<br><br>''Cf.'' Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 145;<br> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 44, 347, 348;<br> Stenzler, ''ibid.,'' 9, 669 ''et seq.''</ref> but see '''[[तुला|Tulā]].'''

दिव्य श्वन्
<u>'''Divya Śvan,'''</u> the ‘divine dog,’ in one passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1316> vi. 80, 1.</ref> appears to denote Canis major or Sirius. But Bloomfield<ref name=fx2_ve1_1316> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 163;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 500, 501.</ref> thinks that the two divine dogs referred to in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve1_1316> i. 6, 9.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_1316> i. 1, 2, 4-6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 353;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 341.</ref> are the sun and moon, and that the sun is meant in the Atharvaveda.

दिश्
<u>'''Diś,'''</u> ‘direction,’ is a word very frequently used in the Rigveda and later<ref name=fx1_ve1_1317> Rv. i. 124, 3;<br> 183, 5;<br> iii. 30, 12;<br> Av. iii. 31, 4;<br> xi. 2, 12, etc.</ref> to denote a quarter of the sky. As a general rule, four quarters are mentioned--east, south, west, north.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1317> Rv. vii. 72, 5;<br> x. 36, 14;<br> 42, 11;<br> Av. xv. 2, 1 ''et seq.,'' etc.</ref> But the number of the ‘directions’ is sometimes increased up to ten by the addition to these four of various others. The five points include the zenith (''ūrdhvā'');<ref name=fx3_ve1_1317> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 15;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 8, 9.</ref> the six, the zenith and the nadir (''ūrdhvā'' and ''avācī'');<ref name=fx4_ve1_1317> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 12, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 24;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 2, 4.</ref> the seven, the zenith, the ground on which one stands (''[[ध्रुवा|dhruvā]]''), and the air (''antarikṣa'') between these two (''vyadhvā'');<ref name=fx5_ve1_1317> Rv. ix. 114, 3;<br> Av. iv. 40, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 4, 1, 20;<br> ix. 5, 2, 8;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 7.</ref> the eight include the intermediate quarters (S.E., S.W., N.E., N.W.);<ref name=fx6_ve1_1317> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 15;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 1, 40, etc.</ref> the nine add to these the zenith;<ref name=fx7_ve1_1317> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 28, 2.</ref> the ten, zenith and nadir.<ref name=fx8_ve1_1317> Rv. i. 164, 14;<br> viii. 101, 13;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 2, 2, 34;<br> viii. 4, 2, 13, etc.</ref> The number  five is sometimes made up by the ground beneath the observer's feet (''[[ध्रुवा|dhruvā]]''),<ref name=fx9_ve1_1317> Av. viii. 9, 15;<br> xiii. 3, 6;<br> xv. 14, 1-5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ix. 32;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 4, 3, 10, and ''cf.'' '''[[ध्रुवा|Dhruvā]].'''</ref> and the number six by that point (''[[ध्रुवा|dhruvā]]'') and the zenith (''ūrdhvā'');<ref name=fx10_ve1_1317> Av. iii. 27, 1;<br> iv. 14, 8;<br> xii. 3, 55;<br> xv. 4, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' xviii. 3, 34;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 14, etc. ''Cf.'' Rv. x. 14, 16.</ref> the ‘lofty’ (''bṛhatī'')<ref name=fx11_ve1_1317> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiv. 13, [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 8.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 359;<br> Weber, ''Proceedings of the Berlin Academy,'' 1895, 846;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 293. 294;<br> 18, 153;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> sometimes taking the place of the ‘vertical’ (''ūrdhvā'').

दीर्घ-तमस्
<u>'''Dīrgha-tamas'''</u> (‘long darkness’) '''[[मामतेय|Māmateya]]''' (‘son of Mamatā’) '''Aucathya''' (‘son of Ucatha’) is mentioned as a singer in one hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1318> i. 158, 1. 6.</ref> and is referred to in several passages<ref name=fx2_ve1_1318> i. 147, 3;<br> 152, 6;<br> iv. 4, 13. In viii. 9, 10, [[दीर्घतमस्|Dīrghatamas]] is mentioned with [[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]], but not as a relative.</ref> by his metronymic, [[मामतेय|Māmateya]], alone. He is said, both in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1318/> and in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1318> ii. 17;<br> Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaha,'' 14.</ref> to have attained the tenth decade of life. In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_1318> viii. 23.</ref> he appears as the priest of '''[[भरत|Bharata]].''' The Bṛhaddevatā<ref name=fx5_ve1_1318> iv. 11-15;<br> 21-25, with Macdonell's notes.</ref> contains a preposterous legend made up of fragments of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1318> From i. 140-164, which hymns are traditionally attributed to [[दीर्घतमस्|Dīrghatamas]]. But see Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischn Gesellschaft,'' 42, 221.</ref> according to which [[दीर्घतमस्|Dīrghatamas]] was born blind, but recovered his sight; in old age he was thrown into a river by his servants, one of whom, '''[[त्रैतन|Traitana]],''' attacked him, but killed himself instead. Carried down by the stream, he was cast up in the [[अङ्ग|Aṅga]] country, where he married Uśij, a slave girl, and begot '''[[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]].''' The two legends here combined are not even consistent, for the second ignores Dīrghatamas' recovery of sight. To attach any historical importance to them, as does Pargiter,<ref name=fx7_ve1_1318> ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society.'' 1910, 44.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rig veda, 3, 164, 165;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 226, 232, 247, 268, 279.</ref> would seem to be unwise. 

दीर्घ-नीथ
<u>'''Dīrgha-nītha'''</u> appears to be the proper name of a sacrificer in one hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1319> viii. 50, 10. ''Cf.'' Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' Ludwig understands the word as an adjective, meaning ‘of long duration.’</ref>

दीर्घ-श्रवस्
<u>'''Dīrgha-śravas'''</u> (‘far-famed’) is the name of a royal seer who, according to the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1320> xv. 3, 25.</ref> having been banished from his kingdom, and suffering from actual hunger, ‘saw’ a certain Sāman (chant), and thus obtained food. In one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1320> i. 112, 11.</ref> an [[औशिज|Auśija]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_1320> A metronymic, ‘descendant of Uśij,’ according to Sāyaṇa;<br> but an adjective, meaning ‘desirous,’ according to Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> a merchant (''[[वणिज्|vaṇij]]''), is mentioned as ''[[दीर्घ-श्रवस्|dīrgha-śravas]],'' which may be a proper name, as Sāyaṇa holds, or an adjective, as it is understood by Roth.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1320> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 114.</ref>

दीर्घाप्सस्
<u>'''Dīrghāpsas,'''</u> used in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1321> i. 122, 15.</ref> as an epithet of a chariot, means, according to Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1321> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Cf.'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 312.</ref> ‘having a long front part.’

दीर्घायुत्व
<u>'''Dīrghāyutva,'''</u> ‘longevity,’ is a constant object of the prayers of the Vedic Indians,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1322> Rv. x. 62, 2;<br> Av. i. 22, 2, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 9, 1, 13, etc. So the adjective ''dīrghāyus,'' Rv. iv. 15, 9. 10;<br> x. 85, 39;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xii. 100, etc. The Brāhmaṇas regularly express the reward for ritual actions by the phrase ''sarvam āyur eti,'' ‘he lives all his days.’ The ideal of life is 100 years. See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 193;<br> ''Festgruss an Roth,'' 137;<br> Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 384.</ref> and length of life is never deprecated in the Saṃhitās and Brāhmaṇas, while the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1322> ii. 13;<br> 28;<br> 29;<br> vii. 32, and many other hymns. See Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 49 ''et seq.;<br> Atharvaveda,'' 63-65.</ref> is full of spells intended to prolong existence (''āyuṣyāṇi'').

दीर्घारण्य
<u>'''Dīrghāraṇya,'''</u> ‘wide tract of forest,’ in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1323> iii. 44;<br> vi. 23.</ref> and Śatapatha<ref name=fx2_ve1_1323> xiii. 3, 7, 10.</ref> Brāhmanas refers to the extensive jungles which  must clearly then have covered Northern India. In one of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] passages<ref name=fx3_ve1_1323> iii. 44.</ref> it is said that in the east the villages are close together and frequent, while in the west there are forests.

दीव्
<u>'''Dīv'''</u> (fem.) in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1324> x. 27, 17.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1324> vii. 50, 9;<br> 109, 5.</ref> denotes the ‘game of dice.’ See '''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]].'''

दुघा
<u>'''Dughā,'''</u> ‘yielding milk,’ denotes ‘cow’ in a few passages in the Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1325> Rv. viii. 50, 3;<br> x. 67, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxviii. 16, 39, etc.</ref>

दुन्दुभि
<u>'''Dundubhi,'''</u> apparently an onomatopoetic word, means ‘drum,’ as used in both war and peace. It is often mentioned from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1326> i. 28, 5;<br> vi. 47, 29. 31.</ref> onwards.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1326> Av. v. 20, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' 21, 7;<br> 31, 7;<br> vi. 38, 4;<br> xii. 1, 41;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 6, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, 5, 6;<br> ''dundubhya,'' ‘connected with the drum,’ Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 35.</ref> A special sort of drum was the ‘earth drum,’ made by digging a hole in the ground and covering it with a hide. This was employed in the Mahāvrata, a rite performed at the winter solstice, for the purpose of driving away influences hostile to the return of the sun.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1326> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 5 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 477);<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvii. 14, 11;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 1, 5, with Keith's notes;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 148, n. 2;<br> Friedlaender, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 29, 45.</ref> A ‘drumbeater’ is included in the list of sacrificial victims at the Puruṣamedha or ‘human sacrifice.’<ref name=fx4_ve1_1326> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 13, 1 (not in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā). ''Cf.'' Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 4, 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 289;<br> and for the epic drum in battle, Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 318.</ref>

दुर्
<u>'''Dur'''</u> is used several times in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1327> i. 68, 10;<br> 113, 4;<br> 121, 4;<br> 188, 5;<br> ii. 2, 7, etc.</ref> to denote ‘door,’ both literally and metaphorically. 

दुरोण
<u>'''Duroṇa'''</u> is used in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1328> iii. 1, 18;<br> 25, 5;<br> iv. 13, 1;<br> v. 76, 4, etc.</ref> and sometimes later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1328> Av. vii. 17, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxiii. 71, etc.</ref> to denote ‘home,’ both literally and metaphorically. See '''[[गृह|Gṛha]].'''

दुर्-ग
<u>'''Dur-ga,'''</u> ‘hard to approach,’ occurs in the Rigveda as a neuter substantive only, sometimes in the sense of ‘fort,’ ‘stronghold.’<ref name=fx1_ve1_1329> v. 34, 7;<br> vii. 25, 2.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Pur.'''

दुर्-गह
<u>'''Dur-gaha'''</u> is mentioned in a hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1330> viii. 65, 12.</ref> where his grandsons are lauded for their generosity, though Sāyaṇa renders the word adjectivally.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1330> ‘Plunged in distress’ (''duḥkhaṃ gāhamāna'').</ref> In another passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1330> iv. 42, 8.</ref> however, Sāyaṇa sees in the epithet [[दौर्गह|Daurgaha]] a description of '''[[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]]''' as Durgaha's son, who was either captured by the enemy or slain, and whose wife, '''[[पुरुकुत्सानी|Purukutsānī]],''' then obtained a son, '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]],''' to restore the line; he also quotes a story, not found in the Bṛhaddevatā,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1330> As Roth. St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' says it is.</ref> to support this interpretation. On the other hand, the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_1330> xiii. 5, 4, 5. According to the Naighaṇṭuka (i. 14), [[दौर्गह|Daurgaha]] is a synonym of ‘horse.’</ref> seems to take [[दौर्गह|Daurgaha]] as meaning a horse. Sieg<ref name=fx6_ve1_1330> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 96-102.</ref> thinks that the same sense should be adopted in the Rigveda passage, which he interprets as referring to the sacrifice of a horse, [[दौर्गह|Daurgaha]], by King [[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]] to gain a son; he also sees in Dadhikrāvan, with Pischel<ref name=fx7_ve1_1330> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 124.</ref> and Ludwig,<ref name=fx8_ve1_1330> Translation of the Rigveda, 4, 79. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 71.</ref> a real horse, the charger of [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]]. The Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa's interpretation of [[दौर्गह|Daurgaha]] is, however, doubtful, and cannot be regarded as receiving support from the case of Dadhikrāvan, who was probably a divinity, and not a real horse at all.<ref name=fx9_ve1_1330> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 148, 149.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, ''op. cit.,'' 3, 163, 174;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 301, 302.</ref> 

दुर्-णामन्
<u>'''Dur-ṇāman,'''</u> ‘of evil name,’ is the designation in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1331> x. 162, 2.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1331> ii. 25, 2;<br> viii. 6, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' xvi. 6, 7;<br> xix. 36, 1 ''et seq.'' So also the feminine Durṇāmnī, iv. 17, 5;<br> xix. 36, 6.</ref> of a demon causing disease, or the disease itself. The [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1331> vi. 12.</ref> explains the words as meaning a ‘worm,’ an interpretation which accords with the widespread belief in disease-causing worms.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1331> Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 61;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 314 ''et seq.,'' 351.</ref> Later Durnāman denotes ‘hæmorrhoids.’<ref name=fx5_ve1_1331> Suśruta, 1, 177, 10, etc.</ref>

दुर्-मुख
<u>'''Dur-mukha,'''</u> ‘ugly-faced,’ is the name, in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1332> viii. 23. The reading may be ''a-rājā,'' ‘not a king,’ but this is not necessary.</ref> of a [[पाञ्चाल|Pāñcāla]], that is, [[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]] king, who conquered the world, and whose priest was '''[[बृहद्उक्थ|Bṛhaduktha]].'''

दुर्य
<u>'''Durya,'''</u> ‘belonging to the door or house,’ appears in several passages of the Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_1333> Masculine plural, Rv. i. 91, 19;<br> x. 40, 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 3, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, i. 11;<br> feminine plural, Rv. iv. 1, 9. 18;<br> 2, 12;<br> vii. 1, 11.</ref> as a plural substantive denoting the ‘door-posts,’ or more generally ‘dwelling.’

दुर्योण
<u>'''Duryoṇa'''</u> occurs a few times in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1334> i. 174, 7;<br> v. 29, 10;<br> 32, 8.</ref> in the sense of ‘house.’

दुर्-वराह
<u>'''Dur-varāha'''</u> probably denotes a ‘wild boar.’ It is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1335> xii. 4, 1, 4.</ref> and the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1335> i. 51, 4 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 23, 332).</ref>

दुला
<u>'''Dulā.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] ([[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]]).'''<br>==Foot Notes==

दुश्-चर्मन्
<u>'''Duś-carman,'''</u> ‘afflicted with a skin disease,’ occurs in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1337> ii. 1, 4, 3;<br> 5, 1, 7.</ref> and [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1337> i. 7, 8, 3.</ref> The disease meant is probably leprosy, the usual name of which is '''[[किलास|Kilāsa]].'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1337> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 3, 17;<br> xxiii. 16, 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka v. 4, 12.</ref> 

दुः-शासु
<u>'''Duḥ-śāsu'''</u> is possibly a proper name in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1338> x. 33, 1.</ref> and would then denote an enemy of '''Kuruśravaṇa.''' Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_1338> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 165.</ref> thinks that he was a '''[[पर्शु|Parśu]]''' or Persian, but this is most improbable, and the word may simply be an adjective meaning ‘malignant.’

दुः-शीम
<u>'''Duḥ-śīma'''</u> is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1339> x. 93, 14.</ref> as a generous donor, his patronymic perhaps being '''[[तान्व|Tānva]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1339> x. 93, 15.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 166.</ref>

दुष्-टरीतु
<u>'''Duṣ-ṭarītu,'''</u> ‘hard to defeat,’ is the name of a king of the '''Sṛñjayas,''' who was deposed from a principality that had existed for ten generations, but was re-instated by '''[[चाक्र|Cākra]] [[स्थपति|Sthapati]]''' in spite of the resistance of '''[[बल्हिक प्रातिपीय|Balhika Prātipīya]],''' according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1340> xii. 9, 3, 1 ''et seq. Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 205-207.</ref>

दुः-षन्त
<u>'''Duḥ-ṣanta.'''</u> See '''[[दौःषन्ति|Dauḥṣanti]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

दुहितृ
<u>'''Duhitṛ'''</u> is the regular designation of ‘daughter’ from the Rigveda onwards.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1342> Rv. viii. 101, 15;<br> x. 17, 1;<br> 40, 5;<br> 61, 5, 7;<br> Av. ii. 14, 2;<br> vi. 100, 3;<br> vii. 12, 1;<br> x. 1, 25;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 4, 1;<br> 8, 1, 8, etc.</ref> The word appears to be derived from ''duh,'' ‘milk,’ in the sense of one who nourishes a child, rather than as the ‘milker’ of the primitive family or the suckling.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1342> Delbrück, ''Dic indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 454.</ref> See also '''[[स्त्री|Strī]], Pati, [[पितृ|Pitṛ]], [[भ्रातृ|Bhrātṛ]].'''

दूत
<u>'''Dūta,'''</u> ‘messenger’ or envoy,' is found several times in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1343> iii. 3, 2;<br> vi. 8, 4;<br> vii. 3, 3;<br> x. 14, 12.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1343> Av. viii. 8, 10, etc.;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 1, 6;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1, etc. The feminine form Dūtī is found in Rv. x. 108, 2, 3, in the story of Saramā's mission to the Paṇis. Dūtya, ‘mission,’ occurs in Rv. 1, 12, 4;<br> 161, 1;<br> iv. 7, 8;<br> 8, 4, etc.</ref> used metaphorically. The '''[[सूत|Sūta]]''' seems to have performed the duties later assigned to the [[दूत|Dūta]]. 

दूर्वा
<u>'''Dūrvā,'''</u> a species of grass (''Panicum dactylon''), is mentioned frequently from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1344> x. 16, 13;<br> 134, 5;<br> 142, 8.</ref> onwards.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1344> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 9, 2;<br> v. 2, 8, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 20;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 5. 8;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 5, 10, 5;<br> vii. 4, 2, 10, 12, etc.</ref> It grew in damp ground.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1344> Rv. x. 16, 13;<br> 142, 8.</ref> A simile occurring in the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_1344> x. 134, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 70.</ref> seems to indicate that the ears lay horizontal with the stem. ''Cf.'' '''[[पाकदूर्वा|Pākadūrvā]].'''

दूर्श
<u>'''Dūrśa,'''</u> denoting some kind of garment, is mentioned twice in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1345> iv. 7, 6;<br> viii. 6, 11.</ref> Weber<ref name=fx2_ve1_1345> ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 29.</ref> thinks that it was worn by the aborigines.

दूषीका
<u>'''Dūṣīkā,'''</u> ‘rheum of the eyes,’ is mentioned as a disease in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1346> xvi. 6, 8.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1346> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 12;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxv. 9;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 3, 10.</ref>

दृढ-च्युत् आगस्ति
<u>'''Dṛḍha-cyut Āgasti'''</u> (‘descendant of Agastya’) is mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1347> iii. 233 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 38). He is given in the Anukramaṇī (where the form of the patronymic is [[आगस्त्य|Āgastya]]) as the author of Rv. ix. 25. ''Cf. Indische Studien,'' 3, 219.</ref> as having been Udgātṛ priest at the Sattra (‘sacrificial session’) of the Vibhindukīyas.

दृढ-जयन्त
<u>'''Dṛḍha-jayanta.'''</u> See '''Vipaścit''' and '''[[वैपश्चित|Vaipaścita]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

दृति
<u>'''1. Dṛti,'''</u> a ‘leather bag to hold fluids,’ is frequently mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1349> i. 191, 10;<br> iv. 51, 1, 3;<br> v. 83, 7;<br> vi. 48, 18;<br> 103, 2;<br> viii. 5, 19;<br> 9, 18.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1349> Av. vii. 18, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 19, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxvi. 18, 19;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 3, 4;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], v. 10, 2, etc.</ref> In one passage<ref name=fx3_ve1_1349> Rv. vii. 89, 2. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 20, 30.</ref> it is called ''dhmāta,'' ‘inflated,’ the man afflicted with dropsy being compared with such a bag. Milk ('''[[क्षीर|Kṣīra]]''') and intoxicating liquor ('''[[सुरा|Surā]]''') are mentioned as kept in bags.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1349> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 11, 26;<br> xvi. 13, 13.</ref> 

दृति ऐन्द्रोत
<u>'''2. Dṛti Aindrota'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[इन्द्रोत|Indrota]]'''’) is mentioned in the Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1350> xiv. 1, 12. 15.</ref> as a contemporary of '''[[अभिप्रतारिन् काक्षसेनि|Abhipratārin Kākṣaseni]]''' and as a pupil of '''[[इन्द्रोत|Indrota]] [[दैवाप|Daivāpa]]''' in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Jaīminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1350> iii. 40, 2.</ref> Possibly the same [[दृति|Dṛti]] is meant in the compound [[दृति|Dṛti]]-Vātavantau, which is found in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_1350> xxv. 3, 6. So a Sattra of a year's duration is later called ''[[दृति|Dṛti]]-vātavator ayana,'' Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxiv. 4, 16;<br> 6, 25;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 3;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 23, 1;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 10, 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 52, 53.</ref> The former is here said to have continued, after the Mahāvrata was over, the sacrificial session in which both had been engaged, with the result that his descendants prospered more than the Vātavatas.

दृप्त-बालाकि गार्ग्य
<u>'''Dṛpta-[[बालाकि|bālāki]] Gārgya'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[गर्ग|Garga]]'''’) is the name of a teacher who is mentioned in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (ii. 1, 1) as a contemporary of '''[[अजातशत्रु|Ajātaśatru]]''' of '''[[काशि|Kāśi]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

दृभीक
<u>'''Dṛbhīka'''</u> is the name of a man<ref name=fx1_ve1_1352> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 152, 207, who compares the Derbikes;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 162.</ref> or a demon,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1352> Grassmann, ''Wo7rterbuch, s.v.;<br>'' Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 85.</ref> who, according to the Rigveda,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1352> ii. 14, 3.</ref> was slain by Indra.

दृशान भार्गव
<u>'''Dṛśāna Bhārgava'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[भृगु|Bhṛgu]]'''’) is mentioned as a seer in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1353> xvi. 8. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 459.</ref>

दृषद्
<u>'''Dṛṣad'''</u> appears in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1354> vii. 104, 22;<br> viii. 72, 4.</ref> and Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1354> ii. 31, 1;<br> v. 23, 8.</ref> to denote not a millstone,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1354> Roth. St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 269.</ref> but merely a stone used to pound grain, which was placed on another stone as a support. When used later<ref name=fx4_ve1_1354> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 8, 3;<br> 9, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 1, 22;<br> ii. 6, 1, 9, etc.</ref>  in connexion with '''[[उपला|Upalā]],''' the lower and the upper millstone, or mortar and pestle may be meant; but this is not certain. Eggeling<ref name=fx5_ve1_1354> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 11 (''[[दृषद्|dṛṣad]]-upale,'' which are here distinguished from ‘mortar and pestle,’ ''[[उलूखल|ulūkhala]]-musale'').<br><br>''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 108, 109.</ref> renders them as the large and small millstones. See also '''[[उपर|Upara]]''' and '''[[उपला|Upalā]].'''

दृषद्वती
<u>'''Dṛṣadvatī,'''</u> ‘stony,’ is the name of a river which flows into the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]''' after running for a time parallel to it. It is mentioned in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1355> iii. 23, 4.</ref> along with the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] and the '''[[आपया|Āpayā]],''' as the scene of action of the [[भरत|Bharata]] princes. In the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1355> xxv. 10, 13.</ref> and later<ref name=fx3_ve1_1355> Kātyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxiv. 6, 6, 38;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 19, 4.</ref> the [[दृषद्वती|Dṛṣadvatī]] and the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] are the scene of special sacrifices. In Manu<ref name=fx4_ve1_1355> ii. 17.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 18;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 34;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 67, 102;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 87.</ref> these two rivers form the western boundary of the Middle Country.

दृष्ट
<u>'''Dṛṣṭa.'''</u> See '''[[अदृष्ट|Adṛṣṭa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

देवक मान्यमान
<u>'''Devaka Mānyamāna'''</u> (‘descendant of Manyamāna’) appears in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1357> vii. 18, 20 (''devakaṃ cin mānyamānam'').</ref> as an opponent of the Tṛtsus, and as connected with [[शम्बर|Śambara]]. Possibly, however, as Grassmann suggests, the words should be understood as denoting [[शम्बर|Śambara]], ‘who deemed himself a god,’ ''devaka'' being used contemptuously.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1357> ''Cf.'' Rv. ii. 11. 2 (''amartyaṃ cid dāsam manyamānam'').<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 173.</ref>

देवकी-पुत्र
<u>'''Devakī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of Devakī,’ is the metronymic of '''[[कृष्ण|Kṛṣṇa]]''' in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1358> iii. 17, 6.</ref> According to the Epic,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1358> Mahābhārata, i. 4480;<br> v. 80, etc.</ref> a Devaka was father of Devakī, Kṛṣṇa's mother; the St. Petersburg Dictionary suggests that he was the ‘king of the Gandharvas’, also referred to in the Epic.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1358> ''Ibid.,'' i. 2704.</ref> 

देव-जन-विद्या
<u>'''Deva-jana-vidyā,'''</u> ‘knowledge of divine beings,’ is one of the sciences enumerated in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1359> xiii. 4, 3, 10. ''Cf.'' x. 5, 2, 20.</ref> and the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1359> vii. 1, 2. 4;<br> 2, 1;<br> 7, 1.</ref>

देव-तरस् श्यावसायन काश्यप
<u>'''Deva-taras [[श्यावसायन|Śyāvasāyana]] Kāśyapa'''</u> (‘descendant of Kaśyapa’) is mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1360> iii. 40, 2.</ref> as a pupil of '''Rsyasṛṅga.''' In the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_1360> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373.</ref> as Śāvasāyana, he is a pupil of his father [[शवस्|Śavas]], who again was a pupil of Kāśyapa.

देवत्या
<u>'''Devatyā'''</u> occurs in the text of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1361> i. 22, 3.</ref> where it must, if the reading is correct, denote some animal.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1361> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> But the reading should no doubt be ''[[रोहिणी|rohiṇī]]-devatyās,'' ‘having the red one as deity.’<ref name=fx3_ve1_1361> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 23.</ref>

देवन
<u>'''Devana'''</u> is mentioned once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1362> x. 43, 5.</ref> in connexion with dicing. The word must designate the place on which the dice are thrown (elsewhere called '''[[अधिदेवन|Adhidevana]]'''), and it is so explained by [[दुर्ग|Durga]] in his commentary on the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1362> v. 22.<br><br>''Cf.'' Lüders, ''Das Würfelspiel im alten Indien,'' 14.</ref>

देव-नक्षत्र
<u>'''Deva-nakṣatra,'''</u> ‘asterism of the gods,’ is the name applied in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1363> i. 5, 2, 6, 7. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 309, 310.</ref> to the first fourteen lunar mansions, which are said to be south, while the others are called [[यमनक्षत्र|Yamanakṣatra]], ‘asterisms of Yama,’ and are said to be north. See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''

देव-भाग श्रौतर्ष
<u>'''Deva-bhāga Śrautarṣa'''</u> is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1364> ii. 4, 4, 5. This passage is misquoted by Sāyaṇa on Rv. i. 81, 3. See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 2, 9. n.;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 152.</ref> as the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], or ‘domestic priest,’ of both the  '''Sṛñjayas''' and the '''Kurus.''' In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1364> vii. x.</ref> he is said to have taught '''[[गिरिज बाभ्रव्य|Girija Bābhravya]]''' the science of the dissection of the sacrificial animal (''pasor vibhakti''). In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1364> iii. 10, 9, 11.</ref> he is an authority on the Sāvitra Agni.

देव-मलिम्लुच्
<u>'''Deva-malimluc,'''</u> ‘robber of the gods,’ is the epithet of Rahasya,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1365> Or Rahasyu.</ref> who is said in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1365> xiv. 4, 7. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 51, 52.</ref> to have slain the pious '''Vaikhānasas''' at '''[[मुनिमरण|Munimaraṇa]]''' (‘saint's death’). He was apparently an Asura, but may have been a real person.

देव-मुनि
<u>'''Deva-muni,'''</u> ‘divine saint,’ is the epithet of '''Tura''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xxv. 14, 5). The name is given in the Anukramaṇī to the author of a hymn of the Rigveda (x. 146).<br>==Foot Notes==

देव-राजन्
<u>'''Deva-rājan'''</u> apparently denotes a king of Brahminical descent in the phrase ‘Sāmans of Devarājans’ in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xviii. 10, 5). ''Cf.'' '''[[राजन्यर्षि|Rājanyarṣi]]''' and '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

देव-रात
<u>'''Deva-rāta'''</u> (‘god-given’) '''[[वैश्वामित्र|Vaiśvāmitra]]''' (‘descendant of '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]'''’) is the name given to [[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]] after his adoption by [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1368> vii. 17. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 27.</ref>

देवल
<u>'''Devala'''</u> is mentioned as a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā (xxii. 11). See also '''[[दैवल|Daivala]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

देववन्त्
<u>'''Devavant'''</u> is mentioned in a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’) in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1370> vii. 18, 22. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 171;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 138.</ref> as the ancestor of '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]],''' apparently his grandfather; or if '''[[पिजवन|Pijavana]]''' be accepted as Sudās' father, and '''Divodāsa''' as his grandfather, then his great-great-grandfather, and father of '''[[वध्र्य्अश्व|Vadhryaśva]].''' The succession in the latter case would then be [[देववन्त्|Devavant]], [[वध्र्य्अश्व|Vadhryaśva]], Divodāsa, [[पिजवन|Pijavana]], [[सुदास्|Sudās]]. 

देव-वात
<u>'''Deva-vāta'''</u> (‘desired of the gods’) is the name of a '''[[भरत|Bharata]]''' prince in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1371> iii. 23, 2. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 409;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 218.</ref> where he is mentioned as sacrificing on the '''[[दृषद्वती|Dṛṣadvatī]], [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]],''' and '''[[आपया|Āpayā]].'''

देव-विद्या
<u>'''Deva-vidyā,'''</u> ‘knowledge of the gods,’ is one of the sciences enumerated in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vii. 1, 2, 4; 2, 1; 7, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

देव-श्रवस्
<u>'''Deva-śravas'''</u> is the name of a '''[[भरत|Bharata]]''' prince who with '''[[देववात|Devavāta]]''' appears as a sacrificer on the '''[[दृषद्वती|Dṛṣadvatī]], [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]],''' and '''[[आपया|Āpayā]]''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1373> iii. 23, 2. 3. In the Anukramaṇī he is called a son of Yama, and has a hymn, x. 17, ascribed to him.</ref>

देवातिथि काण्व
<u>'''Devātithi Kāṇva'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[कण्व|Kaṇva]]'''’) is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1374> ix. 2, 19.</ref> as the seer of a Sāman (chant) by which he turned pumpkins into cows for himself and his son when they were starving in the desert, whither they had been driven by rivals. He is also the reputed author of a hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1374> viii. 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 61.</ref>

देवापि आर्ष्टिषेण
<u>'''Devāpi Ārṣṭiṣeṇa'''</u> (‘descendant of Ṛṣṭiṣeṇa’) is mentioned in a hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1375> x. 98.</ref> and in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1375> ii. 10.</ref> According to the latter source there were two brothers, '''Devāpi''' and '''Śantanu,''' princes of the Kurus. The elder was Devāpi, but Śantanu got himself anointed king, whereupon no rain fell for twelve years. The drought being attributed by the Brahmins to his having superseded his elder brother, Śantanu offered the kingdom to Devāpi. The latter, however, refused, but acting as [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], or domestic priest, for his brother, obtained rain. The Bṛhaddevatā<ref name=fx3_ve1_1375> vii. 148 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes.</ref> tells much the same tale, but adds that the reason for Devāpi's exclusion from the throne was the fact that he suffered from a skin disease. The Epic and later legends further  develop the story, presenting two somewhat discrepant accounts. According to the one version,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1375> Mahābhārata, v. 5054 ''et seq.'' (= 149, 15 ''et seq.''), where Śāntanu is (as also in the Agni, cclxxvii. 34, the Brahma, xiii. 114, 118, and the Viṣṇu Purāṇas) the form of the name;<br> [[मत्स्य|Matsya]] [[पुराण|Purāṇa]], l, 39 ''et seq.,'' in which, as well as in the Bhāgavata, ix. 22, 12, 13, and the Vāyu [[पुराण|Purāṇa]], xcix. 234, 237, the form is Śantanu.</ref> the ground of Devāpi's being passed over was leprosy, while in the other his devoting himself to asceticism in his youth was the cause of his brother's taking his place. The Epic,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1375> Mahābhārata, i. 3751 (= 94, 62);<br> ix. 2285 (= 40, 1);<br> Vāyu [[पुराण|Purāṇa]], ii. 37, 230, etc.</ref> moreover, treats him as a son of Pratīpa, and names as his brothers Bāhlīka<ref name=fx6_ve1_1375> Mahābhārata, cited in n. 4;<br> Harivaṃśa, 1819.</ref> and Āṛṣṭiṣeṇa,<ref name=fx7_ve1_1375> ''Ibid.,'' cited in n. 5.</ref> who is a new figure developed from the patronymic of Devāpi Possibly Sieg<ref name=fx8_ve1_1375> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 136.</ref> is right in holding that two stories, those of Devāpi, Pratīpa's son, and of Devāpi, Ṛṣṭiṣeṇa's son, have been confused; but in any case it is impossible to extract history from them.<ref name=fx9_ve1_1375> As does Pargiter, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1910, 52, 53.</ref><br><br>The Rigvedic hymn certainly appears to represent Devāpi as sacrificing for Śantanu, who seems to be called '''[[औलान|Aulāna]].'''<ref name=fx10_ve1_1375> Rv. x. 98, 11.</ref> But there is no trace in it of the brotherhood of the two men, nor is there anything to show that Devāpi was not a Brahmin, but a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]. Sieg,<ref name=fx11_ve1_1375> ''Op. cit.,'' 129-142.<br><br>''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 272 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 203;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 192 ''et seq.;<br>'' Macdonell, ''Bṛhaddevatā,'' 1, xxix;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 131, 132.</ref> who interprets the hymn by the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], thinks that he was a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]], but on this occasion was enabled by the favour of [[बृहस्पति|Bṛhaspati]] to officiate as priest, and that the hymn shows clear recognition of the unusual character of his action; but this view seems very improbable.

देवृ
<u>'''Devṛ'''</u> is a rare word denoting the wife's ‘brother-in-law’ (that is, the husband's brother). He is included with the sisters of the husband among those over whom the wife of the husband--his elder brother--rules;<ref name=fx1_ve1_1376> Rv. x. 85, 46. ''Cf.'' '''Pati.'''</ref> at the same time the wife is to be devoted to him,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1376> Rv. x. 85, 44.</ref> and friendly to him.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1376> Av. xiv. 2, 18. ''Cf.'' xiv. 1, 39.</ref> After the death  of the husband the [[देवृ|Devṛ]] could perform the duty of begetting a son for him.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1376> Rv. x. 40, 2. ''Cf.'' x. 18, 8;<br> Kaegi, ''Der Rigveda,'' n. 51;<br> Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 385;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 948. ''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 516.</ref> No word occurs for the wife's brother corresponding to [[देवृ|Devṛ]].

देश
<u>'''Deśa,'''</u> ‘land,’ is a word that does not come into use till the time of the Upaniṣads and Sūtras,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1377> Where its use becomes common;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1, 16;<br> 2, 3;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 14, 6;<br> Kātyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 4, 17, etc. So the adjective ''deśīya,'' ‘belonging to a land,’ Kātyāyana, xxii. 4, 22;<br> Lāṭyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 6, 28.</ref> excepting one occurrence in the latest period of the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1377> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 10 (a late passage).</ref> literature, and one in a much-discussed passage of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1377> xxxiv. 11.</ref> where the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]''' is mentioned as having five tributaries. This passage militates against the view that [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] was a name of the Indus, because the use of [[देश|Deśa]] here seems to indicate<ref name=fx4_ve1_1377> ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 10, who thinks that the word crept into the text, where the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] originally meant the Indus, with the five tributaries of the Panjab.</ref> that the seer of the verse placed the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] in the [[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]] or ‘Middle Country,’ to which all the geographical data of the Yajurvedas point.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1377> Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 174.</ref>

देही
<u>'''Dehī'''</u> in two passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1378> vi. 47, 2;<br> vii. 6, 5. ''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 344;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 143.</ref> refers to defences thrown up against an enemy, apparently earthworks or dikes. ''Cf.'' '''Pur.'''

दैधिषव्य
<u>'''Daidhiṣavya'''</u> is mentioned in a [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] of the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1379> iii. 2, 4, 4;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 1, 22;<br> [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 3, 5;<br> 137, 37.</ref> Apparently the word (as derived from '''Didhiṣū''') denotes the son of a younger sister married before the elder sister,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1379> ''American Journal of Philology,'' 17, 431, n.</ref> rather than the son of a woman twice married, the explanation of the St. Petersburg Dictionary. 

दैयांपाति
<u>'''Daiyāṃpāti,'''</u> ‘descendant of Dayāṃpāta,’ is the name of a teacher of the east, who was instructed by '''[[शाण्डिल्यायन|Śāṇḍilyāyana]],''' according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ix. 5, 1, 14), in the lore of the construction of the fire-altar. The same patronymic is given, in the form of Dayyāṃpāti, to '''[[प्लक्ष|Plakṣa]],''' the contemporary of '''Atyaṃhas''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 10, 9, 3-5).<br>==Foot Notes==

दैव
<u>'''1. Daiva'''</u> (masc.) appears in the list of sciences in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1381> vii. 1, 2, 4;<br> 2, 1;<br> 7, 1.</ref> where Śaṅkara explains it as ''utpātajñāna,'' apparently the ‘knowledge of portents.’ The St. Petersburg Dictionary suggests that the word is here used adjectivally, and this view is followed by Little<ref name=fx2_ve1_1381> ''Grammatical Index,'' 83.</ref> and by Bo7htlingk in his translation.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1381> Though he does not render it (''[[दैव|Daiva]] [[निधि|Nidhi]]'').</ref>

दैव
<u>'''2. Daiva'''</u> is the patronymic of the mythical [[अथर्वन्|Atharvan]] in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1382> ii. 5, 22;<br> iv. 5, 28 (Mādhyaṃdina).</ref>

दैवल
<u>'''Daivala,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[देवल|Devala]],’ is the patronymic of '''[[असित|Asita]]''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiv. 11, 18).<br>==Foot Notes==

दैव-वात
<u>'''Daiva-vāta,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[देववात|Devavāta]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''[[सृञ्जय|Sṛñjaya]],''' probably the [[सृञ्जय|Sṛñjaya]] king, in the Rigveda. He is mentioned<ref name=fx1_ve1_1384> Rv. iv. 15, 4.</ref> as a devotee of the fire cult, and as victorious over the '''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]]''' king and the '''Vṛcīvants.'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1384> Rv. vi. 27, 7.</ref> According to Zimmer,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1384> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 133, 134.</ref> his name was '''[[अभ्यावर्तिन् चायमान|Abhyāvartin Cāyamāna]] [[पार्थव|Pārthava]]''' (‘descendant of Pṛthu’), but Hillebrandt<ref name=fx4_ve1_1384> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 105, 106.</ref> recognizes this as doubtful, though he none the less places the Sṛñjayas to the west of the Indus with '''Divodāsa.''' What is more important is to note that the name suggests connexion with the [[भरत|Bharata]] '''[[देववात|Devavāta]],''' and as '''Kurus''' and Sṛñjayas were closely connected<ref name=fx5_ve1_1384> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 4, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 402, 405;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 153.</ref> this is not immaterial. 

दैवाप
<u>'''Daivāpa,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Devāpi,'''’ is the patronymic of '''[[इन्द्रोत|Indrota]]''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1385> xiii. 5, 4, 1.</ref> and the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1385> iii. 40, 1.</ref> No connexion can be traced with the Devāpi of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1385> x. 98. See Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 240.</ref>

दैवावृध
<u>'''Daivāvṛdha,'''</u> ‘descendant of Devāvṛdha,’ is the patronymic of '''[[बभ्रु|Babhru]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 34).<br>==Foot Notes==

दैवो-दासि
<u>'''Daivo-dāsi,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Divodāsa,'''’ is the patronymic of '''[[प्रतर्दन|Pratardana]]''' in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1387> xxvi. 5.</ref> and the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1387> iii. 1. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 214.</ref> It is impossible to ascertain whether the famous Divodāsa is meant.

दोषा
<u>'''Doṣā,'''</u> ‘evening,’ is frequently referred to from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1388> i. 34, 3;<br> 179, 1;<br> ii. 8, 3;<br> iv. 2, 8;<br> v. 5, 6;<br> 32, 11;<br> vi. 5, 2, etc.</ref> onwards,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1388> Av. vi. 1, 1;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iv. 17.</ref> usually as contrasted with ''uṣas,'' ‘dawn.’ In the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1388> vi. 13, 1.</ref> the word is contrasted with ''[[प्रातर्|prātar]],'' ‘early.’ See also '''Ahan.'''

दोह
<u>'''Doha,'''</u> ‘milking,’ is a common word in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1389> iv. 11, 4. 9. 12;<br> v. 17, 17;<br> viii. 9, 15 (where five milkings are referred to metaphorically). In Rv. x. 42, 2, the literal sense is found.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1389> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, viii. 62;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 10, 2;<br> ii. 2, 9, 9, etc.</ref> Reference is made in the Sūtras<ref name=fx3_ve1_1389> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 2, 38, etc.</ref> to the ''sāyaṃ-doha,'' ‘evening milking,’ and the ''[[प्रातर्|prātar]]-doha,'' ‘morning milking.’ Dohana has the same sense.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1389> Rv. viii. 12, 32;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 2, 3, 30;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 2, 37, etc.</ref> See also '''Go.'''

दौरे-श्रवस्
<u>'''Daure-śravas,'''</u> ‘descendant of Dūreśravas,’ is the patronymic of the priest '''[[पृथुश्रवस्|Pṛthuśravas]],''' who officiated at the snake sacrifice described in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xxv. 15, 3). <br>==Foot Notes==

दौरे-श्रुत
<u>'''Daure-śruta,'''</u> ‘descendant of Dūreśruta,’ is the patronymic of the priest '''Timirgha,''' who officiated at the snake sacrifice described in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xxv. 15, 3).<br>==Foot Notes==

दौर्-गह
<u>'''Daur-gaha.'''</u> See '''[[दुर्गह|Durgaha]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

दौः-षन्ति
<u>'''Dauḥ-ṣanti'''</u> (‘descendant of Duḥṣanta’) is the patronymic of [[भरत|Bharata]] in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] (viii. 23) and Śatapatha (xiii. 5, 4, 11) Brāhmaṇas.<br>==Foot Notes==

द्युतान मारुत
<u>'''Dyutāna Māruta'''</u> (‘descendant of the Maruts’) is the name of a divine being invoked in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1394> v. 27.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1394> v. 5, 9, 4. ''Cf.'' vi. 2, 10, 4.</ref> and also mentioned in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1394> xv. 7.</ref> In the Śatapatha<ref name=fx4_ve1_1394> iii. 6, 1, 16.</ref> [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] the name is explained to mean Vāyu, while in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_1394> xvii. 1, 7. ''Cf.'' vi. 4, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 311;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 220.</ref> he seems to be regarded as the author of a Sāman (chant). He is treated as a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] by the Anukramaṇī, which credits him with the authorship of a hymn of the Rigveda (viii. 96).

द्युम्न
<u>'''Dyumna,'''</u> according to Pischel,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1395> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 35, 720 ''et seq.''</ref> denotes ‘raft’ in one passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1395> viii. 19, 14.</ref>

द्यूत
<u>'''Dyūta,'''</u> ‘dicing,’ is mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1396> xii. 3, 46.</ref> and the Sūtras.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1396> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 6, 2;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 10, 23, etc.</ref> See '''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]].'''

द्योतन
<u>'''Dyotana'''</u> is, according to Sāyaṇa, the name of a prince in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1397> vi. 20, 8.</ref> This is probably correct, though the word may also<ref name=fx2_ve1_1397> As by Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 380.<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 55, 328.</ref> be interpreted as denoting ‘glorification’ but it is not clear what relation existed between [[द्योतन|Dyotana]] and the other persons mentioned in the same passage, '''[[वेतसु|Vetasu]], [[दशोणि|Daśoṇi]], [[तूतुजि|Tūtuji]],''' and '''[[तुग्र|Tugra]].''' 

द्रप्स
<u>'''Drapsa'''</u> is a common word from the Rigveda onwards<ref name=fx1_ve1_1398> Rv. i. 94, 11 (perhaps a ‘drop’ of fire);<br> v. 63, 4 (‘rain-drop’);<br> vii. 33, 11 (= ''retas'');<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 1, 2, 6;<br> ''drapsin'' (‘thick-flowing’), xi. 4, 1, 15.</ref> for a ‘drop’: according to Sāyaṇa,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1398> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, 1, p. 70, 7. ''Cf.'' the epithet ''uru-[[द्रप्स|drapsa]],'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 3, 10, 2;<br> Sāyaṇa, on Av. xviii. 4, 18, takes ''[[द्रप्स|drapsa]]'' to mean ‘drops of curd’;<br> so Agnisvāmin on Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 2, 4.</ref> a ‘thick drop’ as opposed to ''stoka,'' a ‘small drop.’ Hence there frequently occurs the expression ''dadḥi-[[द्रप्स|drapsa]],''’ ‘drop of curds.’<ref name=fx3_ve1_1398> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 2, 3, 40.</ref> In the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_1398> ix. 78, 4;<br> 85, 10;<br> 89, 2;<br> 97, 56;<br> 108, 8;<br> x. 11, 4;<br> 17, 11. 12. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 3, 9. 1.</ref> the word normally denotes the thick drops of Soma or the Soma itself.<br><br>In two passages<ref name=fx5_ve1_1398> iv. 13, 2, and ''drapsin'' in i. 64, 2.</ref> Roth<ref name=fx6_ve1_1398> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. [[सत्वन्|satvan]];<br>'' Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v. [[द्रप्स|drapsa]], drapsin.''</ref> sees the sense of ‘banner,’ which is adopted by Oldenberg.<ref name=fx7_ve1_1398> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 46, 357: ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 64, 65.</ref> Geldner,<ref name=fx8_ve1_1398> ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 57, 58;<br> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 88.</ref> on the other hand, considers that ‘dust’ is meant, but this interpretation is not very probable. Max Müller<ref name=fx9_ve1_1398> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 104. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 80, with reference to Rv. i. 64, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''op. cit.,'' pp. 105, 113.</ref> renders the word ‘rain-drop’ in one of the passages.

द्रापि
<u>'''Drāpi'''</u> occurs several times in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1399> i. 25, 13;<br> 116, 10;<br> iv. 33, 2;<br> ix. 86, 14;<br> 100, 9;<br> Av. iii. 13, 1.</ref> in the sense of ‘mantle’ or ‘cloak.’<ref name=fx2_ve1_1399> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 472;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 333.</ref> Sāyaṇa, however, renders the word by ‘coat of mail’<ref name=fx3_ve1_1399> ''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 536;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 201, 202.</ref> (''[[कवच|kavaca]]''). This seems needless, but none of the passages are very decisive one way or the other.

द्रु
<u>'''Dru'''</u> denotes a vessel made of wood,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1400> Rv. i. 161, 1;<br> v. 86, 3;<br> viii. 66, 11;<br> in x. 101, 10, the mortar seems meant. In v. 86, 3, Bo7htlingk takes it to denote a ‘wooden handle.’</ref> and in particular the vessel used at the Soma sacrifice,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1400> ix. 1, 2;<br> 65, 6;<br> 98, 2.</ref> perhaps, as Hillebrandt<ref name=fx3_ve1_1400> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 191, 192.</ref> suggests, to catch the Soma juice when running through the sieve. In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_1400> i. 3, 9, 1. So often in compounds, ''e.g.,'' Rv. ii. 7, 6;<br> vi. 12, 4, etc.</ref> the word simply means ‘wood.’ 

द्रु-घण
<u>'''Dru-ghaṇa'''</u> is found in the [[मुद्गल|Mudgala]] hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1401> x. 101, 9.</ref> and in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1401> vii. 28, 1.</ref> The sense is uncertain. [[यास्क|Yāska]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1401> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 23.</ref> renders it as a ‘''ghana'' made of wood,’ probably, as Roth<ref name=fx4_ve1_1401> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> takes it, meaning a ‘club of wood.’ Geldner<ref name=fx5_ve1_1401> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 3, 4.</ref> thinks that it was a wooden bull used by [[मुद्गल|Mudgala]] as a substitute for a second bull when he wanted to join in a race. But this interpretation of the legend is very improbable.<ref name=fx6_ve1_1401> ''Cf.'' von Bradke, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 46, 462;<br> Bloomfield, ''ibid.,'' 48, 456;<br> Franke, ''Vienna Oriental Journal,'' 8, 342.</ref> Whitney<ref name=fx7_ve1_1401> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 407.</ref> translates the word as ‘tree-smiter’ in the Atharvaveda, quoting Sāyaṇa, who explains it as a ‘cutting instrument,’ so called because trees are struck with it.

द्रु-पद
<u>'''Dru-pada,'''</u> a ‘wooden pillar’ or ‘post,’ is several times referred to in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1402> i. 24, 13;<br> iv. 32, 23.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1402> Av. vi. 63, 3;<br> 115, 2;<br> xix. 47, 9;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xx. 20.</ref> [[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]] was bound to three posts for sacrifice.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1402> Rv. i. 24, 13.</ref> Thieves, there is some evidence to show, were tied to posts as a penalty for stealing.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1402> Av. xix. 47, 9;<br> 50, 1. ''Cf.'' vi. 63, 3 = 84, 4. See Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 181, 182, and [[तस्कर|Taskara]]. n. 26.</ref>

द्रुम
<u>'''Druma,'''</u> ‘tree,’ is not found until the later period in the Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (v. 11) and the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (iv. 19; v. 26; ix. 23).<br>==Foot Notes==

द्रुवय
<u>'''Druvaya,'''</u> ‘wooden,’ is used in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1404> v. 20, 2. ''Cf.'' xi. 1, 12, where it is an epithet of ''upaśvasa,'' ‘blower,’ possibly ‘bellows’;<br> but the manuscripts in part read ''dhruvaye,'' and the Paippalāda has ''druye.''</ref> as an epithet of the drum.

द्रु-हन्
<u>'''Dru-han,'''</u> ‘wood-cutter,’ seems to be meant by the word ''druhantara'' in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1405> i. 127, 2.</ref> where it is usually taken as ''druhaṃtara,'' ‘fiend-overpowering.’ But as an epithet of ''[[परशु|paraśu]],'' ‘axe,’ the other sense (‘mighty wood-cutter’)<ref name=fx2_ve1_1405> But if this explanation is correct, the word should have the accentuation of the comparative. See Oldenberg, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 46, 132.</ref> is more probable.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1405> ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 130.</ref> 

द्रुह्यु
<u>'''Druhyu'''</u> is the name of a people mentioned several times in the Rigveda. In one passage<ref name=fx1_ve1_1406> i. 108, 8.</ref> it occurs, in the plural, with the '''Yadus, Turvaśas, Anus,''' and '''Pūrus,''' suggesting that these are the famous five peoples of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1406> ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 122, 125;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 258 ''et seq.''</ref> Again, the [[द्रुह्यु|Druhyu]] king shared in the defeat of his allies by '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]],''' and appears to have perished in the waters.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1406> vii. 18.</ref> In a second passage [[द्रुह्यु|Druhyu]], Anu, [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]], and Yadu are all mentioned in the singular,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1406> viii. 10, 5.</ref> while in another [[पूरु|Pūru]] and [[द्रुह्यु|Druhyu]] occur.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1406> vi. 46, 8.</ref> From the tribal grouping it is probable that the Druhyus were a north-western people,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1406> Roth, ''Zur Litteratur und Geschichte des Weda,'' 131-133.</ref> and the later tradition of the Epic connects [[गान्धार|Gāndhāra]] and [[द्रुह्यु|Druhyu]].<ref name=fx7_ve1_1406> Pargiter, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1910, 49.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 205;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 140.</ref>

द्रोण
<u>'''Droṇa'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1407> vi. 2, 8;<br> 37, 2;<br> 44, 20;<br> ix. 93, 1;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 26.</ref> a ‘wooden trough,’ and more specifically it designates in the plural vessels used for holding Soma.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1407> ix. 3, 1;<br> 15, 7;<br> 28, 4;<br> 30, 4;<br> 67, 14, etc. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 280.</ref> The great wooden reservoir for Soma is called a [[द्रोण|Droṇa]]-[[कलश|kalaśa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_1407> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 1, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 21;<br> xix. 27;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 17, 32. Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 17, etc.</ref> The altar was sometimes made in the form of a [[द्रोण|Droṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_1407> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 7;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxi. 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 7, 2, 8.</ref>

द्रोणाहाव
<u>'''Droṇāhāva'''</u> is used as an epithet of '''[[अवत|Avata]],''' ‘well,’ in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1408> x. 101, 7. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 157.</ref> apparently in the sense of ‘having wooden buckets’ with reference to the drawing up of water.

द्वादश
<u>'''Dvādaśa,'''</u> ‘consisting of twelve,’<ref name=fx1_ve1_1409> ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 645 ''et seq.''</ref> is used of the year in the Rigveda (vii. 103, 9). See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''

द्वापर
<u>'''Dvāpara.'''</u> See '''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]]''' and '''Yuga.''' <br>==Foot Notes==

द्वार्
<u>'''Dvār'''</u> is frequently used from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1411> i. 13, 6.</ref> onwards<ref name=fx2_ve1_1411> Av. viii. 3, 22;<br> xiv. 1, 63;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 10;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 1, 1, 2;<br> xiv. 3, 1, 13, etc.</ref> to denote the ‘door’ of a house. The later form, Dvāra, has the same sense.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1411> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 1, 19;<br> iv. 3, 5, 9;<br> 6, 7, 9;<br> xi. 4, 4, 2, etc. Av. x. 8, 43, has ''nava-dvāra,'' ‘having nine openings,’ of the body.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[गृह|Gṛha]].''' The ‘door-fastener’ is called Dvārapidhāna in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_1411> xi. 1, 1, 1. ''Cf. dvāra-bāhū,'' ‘doorposts,’ in Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 3, 1;<br> ii. 3, 9.</ref>

द्वार-प
<u>'''Dvāra-pa,'''</u> ‘door-keeper,’ is only found in a metaphorical sense in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 30), where Viṣṇu is called the ‘doorkeeper’ of the gods, and in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iii. 13, 6).<br>==Foot Notes==

द्वि-गत् भार्गव
<u>'''Dvi-gat Bhārgava'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[भृगु|Bhṛgu]]'''’) is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiv. 9) as the seer of a Sāman or Chant, by means of which he twice went to the heavenly world.<br>==Foot Notes==

द्वि-ज
<u>'''Dvi-ja,'''</u> ‘twice-born,’ as an epithet of the Āryans generally, or of the Brahmins in particular, is not found in Vedic literature except in a quite obscure verse of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1414> xix. 71, 1. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 1008;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 204. Neither ''dvijanman'' nor ''dvi-[[जाति|jāti]]'' occurs early, and the idea is not in this form an early one.</ref>

द्वि-पाद्
<u>'''Dvi-pād,'''</u> ‘two-footed,’ ‘biped,’ denotes man, as opposed to quadrupeds, from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1415> i. 49, 3;<br> iii. 62, 14;<br> viii. 27, 12;<br> x. 97, 20;<br> 117, 8.</ref> onwards.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1415> Av. ii. 34, 1;<br> x. 1, 24;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, viii. 30;<br> ix. 31;<br> xiii. 17;<br> xiv. 8, etc.</ref>

द्वि-बन्धु
<u>'''Dvi-bandhu'''</u> is in an obscure hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1416> x. 61, 17.</ref> according to Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_1416> St. Petersburg Dictionary.</ref> and Grassmann,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1416> ''Wo7rterbuch, s.v.,'' and Translation of the Rigveda, 2, 475.</ref> the name of a man, while Ludwig<ref name=fx4_ve1_1416> Translation of the Rigveda, 2, 643, and 5, 526.</ref> renders it as a simple adjective meaning ‘of double kinship.’ 

द्वि-राज
<u>'''Dvi-rāja'''</u> (neut,), ‘conflict between two kings,’ or ‘battle,’ is mentioned in the Atharvaveda (v. 20, 9). ''Cf.'' '''[[दाशराज्ञ|Dāśarājña]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

द्वि-रेतस्
<u>'''Dvi-retas,'''</u> ‘having double seed,’ is an epithet of both the ass<ref name=fx1_ve1_1418> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 9;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 3, 1, 23. ''Cf.'' '''[[गर्दभ|Gardabha]].'''</ref> and the mare.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1418> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 1, 4.</ref>

द्वीप
<u>'''Dvīpa,'''</u> ‘island,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1419> i. 169, 3.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1419> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiii. 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 2, 1, 3;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta Sütra, i. 6, 10.</ref> But there is no reason to imagine that the islands referred to were other than sandbanks in the great rivers, Indus or Ganges.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1419> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 256.</ref> Vedic literature knows nothing of the system of geography according to which the earth consists of four, seven, or thirteen Dvīpas grouped round Mount Meru.

द्वीपिन्
<u>'''Dvīpin,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_1420> Lit., ‘insulated’--''i.e.,'' ‘spotted.’</ref> ‘panther’ or ‘leopard,’ is mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1420> iv. 8, 7;<br> vi. 38, 2;<br> xix. 49, 4, in every case associated with the tiger.</ref> and the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1420> ii. 1. 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 80.</ref>

द्वैत-वन
<u>'''Dvaita-vana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Dvitavana,’ is the patronymic of '''Dhvasan,''' the king of the '''Matsyas,''' whose [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or ‘horse sacrifice,’ is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 5, 4, 9).<br>==Foot Notes==

द्व्य्-ओपश
<u>'''Dvy-opaśa.'''</u> See '''[[ओपश|Opaśa]].''' <br>==Foot Notes==

धन
<u>'''Dhana,'''</u> ‘prize,’ is often found in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1423> Rv. i. 81, 3;<br> vi. 45, 2;<br> viii. 80, 8;<br> ix. 53, 2;<br> 109, 10. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 120;<br> Pischel, ''ibid.,'' 1, 171.</ref> probably the prize in racing rather than the ‘booty’ in battle. It also denotes<ref name=fx2_ve1_1423> Rv. x. 34, 10;<br> Av. iv. 38, 3.</ref> the ‘stake’ at dicing. In some passages it possibly means the ‘contest’ itself.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1423> Rv. i. 31, 6;<br> v. 35, 7;<br> vii. 38, 8;<br> viii. 5, 26;<br> 8, 21;<br> 49, 9;<br> 50, 9;<br> x. 48, 5, etc.</ref> More generally it denotes ‘wealth’ or ‘gift.’<ref name=fx4_ve1_1423> Rv. i. 42, 6;<br> x. 18, 2;<br> 84, 7;<br> Av. i. 15, 3;<br> ii. 7, 4;<br> iii. 15, 2;<br> v. 19, 9;<br> vi. 81, 1;<br> vii. 81, 4;<br> viii. 5, 16, etc.</ref> But it sometimes expresses ‘booty,’<ref name=fx5_ve1_1423> Rv. i. 74, 3;<br> 157, 2, etc.</ref> probably from the notion of ‘wealth’ rather than of ‘prize.’

धन-धानी
<u>'''Dhana-dhānī,'''</u> a ‘treasure house,’ is mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka (x. 67).<br>==Foot Notes==

धनिष्ठा
<u>'''Dhaniṣṭhā'''</u> (‘very rich’), used in the plural, is the later name<ref name=fx1_ve1_1425> Sāntikalpa, 13;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 26.</ref> of the lunar mansion '''([[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]]) Śraviṣṭhā.'''

धनु
<u>'''Dhanu'''</u> (fem.), ‘sandbank,’ occurs several times in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1426> i. 33, 4;<br> 144, 5;<br> viii. 3, 19;<br> x. 4, 3;<br> 27, 17.</ref> but only metaphorically of the clouds in the atmosphere. Dhanū is found in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1426> i. 17, 4.</ref> where it seems to denote a sandbag used to prevent bleeding.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1426> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 411;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 18;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 259, 260.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[धन्वन्|Dhanvan]].'''

धनुस्
<u>'''Dhanus,'''</u> the ‘bow,’ frequently mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1427> viii. 72, 4;<br> 77, 11;<br> ix. 99, 1;<br> x. 18, 9;<br> 125, 6.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1427> Av. iv. 4, 6;<br> 6, 6;<br> v. 18, 8;<br> vii. 50. 9;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 10;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 5, 6;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 14;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 4, 6;<br> v. 3, 1, 11, etc.</ref> was the chief weapon of the Vedic Indian.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1427> Rv. vi. 75, 2. Practically no other weapon plays any substantial part in Vedic warfare.</ref> The last act of the funeral rite included the removal of the bow from  the right hand of the dead man.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1427> Rv. x. 18, 9.</ref> The weapon was composed of a stout staff bent into a curved shape (''vakra''),<ref name=fx5_ve1_1427> Av. iv. 6, 4.</ref> and of a bowstring ('''[[ज्या|Jyā]]''') made of a strip of cowhide<ref name=fx6_ve1_1427> Rv. vi. 75, 11;<br> Av. i. 2, 3.</ref> which joined the ends. The tips of the bow, when the string was fastened, were called '''[[आर्त्नी|Ārtnī]].''' Relaxed when not in actual use, the bow was specially strung up when needed for shooting.<ref name=fx7_ve1_1427> Rv. x. 166, 3;<br> Av. vi. 42, 1.</ref> The stages of the process are given in detail in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā:<ref name=fx8_ve1_1427> xvi. 22.</ref> the stringing (''ā-tan'') of the bow, the placing (''[[प्रति-धा|prati-dhā]]'') of the arrow, the bending (''ā-yam'') of the bow, and the shooting (''as''). The arrow was discharged from the ear,<ref name=fx9_ve1_1427> Rv. vi. 75, 2 ''et seq.'' So also in the Epic, Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 271. The Homeric method is to draw to the breast--''e.g., Iliad,'' iv. 123.</ref> and is hence called ''karṇa-yoni,''<ref name=fx10_ve1_1427> Rv. ii. 24, 8.</ref> ‘having the ear as its point of origin.’<ref name=fx10_ve1_1427/> The making of bows was a regular profession (''dhanuṣ-kāra,''<ref name=fx11_ve1_1427> xxx. 7.</ref> ''dhanuṣ-kṛt'').<ref name=fx12_ve1_1427> xvi. 46.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 298, 299;<br> Hopkins, ''op. cit.,'' 13, 270 ''et seq.'' The Epic bow is about 5(1/2) feet, and the arrow 3 feet in length.</ref> For the arrow see '''[[इषु|Iṣu]],''' and for the handguard '''[[हस्तघ्न|Hastaghna]].'''

धन्वन्
<u>'''1. Dhanvan,'''</u> ‘bow,’ is found frequently in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1428> ii. 24, 8;<br> 33, 10;<br> vi. 59, 7;<br> 75, 2;<br> viii. 20, 2;<br> ix. 69, 1;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 17.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1428> Av. i. 3, 9;<br> iv. 4, 7;<br> xi. 9, 1, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 9, etc.</ref> It also occurs in the compounds ''[[इषु|iṣu]]-dhanva,'' ‘bow and arrow,’<ref name=fx3_ve1_1428> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 19;<br> ''iṣudhanvin,'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 2.</ref> ''[[आज्य|ājya]]-dhanva,''<ref name=fx4_ve1_1428> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 25.</ref> ‘having clarified butter for its bow,’<ref name=fx5_ve1_1428> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 1, 1, 6.</ref> ''adhijya-dhanva,'' ‘bow with string fixed,’ etc. ''Cf.'' '''[[धनुस्|Dhanus]].'''

धन्वन्
<u>'''2. Dhanvan,'''</u> ‘desert,’ is repeatedly mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1429> ii. 38, 7;<br> iii. 45, 1;<br> iv. 17, 2;<br> 19, 7;<br> 33, 7;<br> v. 53, 6;<br> 83, 10, etc. In i. 116, 4, the strand of the ocean ('''[[सम्उद्र|Samudra]]''') is mentioned.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1429> Av. v. 13, 1;<br> vi. 100, 1;<br> vii. 41, 1, etc.</ref> Death from thirst in the desert was not rare,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1429> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 19.</ref> and  the value of a spring in the desert was fully appreciated.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1429> Rv. x. 4, 1. ''Cf.'' vi. 34, 4, etc.;<br> Av. i. 6, 4;<br> xix. 2, 2.</ref> The great desert east of the '''[[सिन्धु|Sindhu]]''' (Indus) and the '''[[शुतुद्री|Śutudrī]]''' (Sutlej) is possibly referred to in one hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1429> x. 86, 20.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 47, 48.</ref>

धमनि
<u>'''Dhamani,'''</u> ‘reed,’ appears to denote ‘pipe’ in a passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1430> ii. 11, 8.</ref> and in a citation appearing in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1430> vi. 24.</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_1430> i. 17, 23;<br> ii. 33, 6;<br> vi. 90, 2;<br> vii. 35, 2. ''Cf.'' Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 19, 2.</ref> it denotes, perhaps, ‘artery’ or ‘vein,’ or more generally ‘intestinal channel,’ being coupled in some passages<ref name=fx4_ve1_1430> i. 17, 3;<br> vii. 35, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 259, 546.</ref> with '''[[हिरा|Hirā]].'''

धरुण
<u>'''Dharuṇa'''</u> in one passage of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā (viii. 51) denotes a ‘sucking calf.’<br>==Foot Notes==

धर्म
<u>'''Dharma,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_1432> i. 22, 18;<br> 164, 43, 50;<br> iii. 3, 1;<br> 17, 1;<br> 60, 6;<br> v. 26, 6;<br> 63, 7;<br> 72, 2, etc.;<br> Av. xiv. 1, 51;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 29, etc. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 90.</ref> '''Dharman,'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1432> [[धर्म|Dharma]] is found in Av. xi. 7, 17;<br> xii. 5, 7;<br> xviii. 3, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 5, 2, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xv. 6;<br> xx. 9;<br> xxx. 6, etc.</ref> are the regular words, the latter in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1432/> and both later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1432/> for ‘law’ or ‘custom.’ But there is very little evidence in the early literature as to the administration of justice or the code of law followed. On the other hand, the [[धर्म|Dharma]] Sūtras<ref name=fx3_ve1_1432> See Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte;<br>'' Foy, ''Die ko7nigliche Gewalt nach den altindischen Rechtsbüchern;<br>'' Bühler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 2 and 14.</ref> contain full particulars.<br><br>(1) ''Criminal Law.''--The crimes recognized in Vedic literature vary greatly in importance, while there is no distinction adopted in principle between real crimes and what now are regarded as fanciful bodily defects or infringements of merely  conventional practices.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1432> Compare the list in Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 9;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxi. 7;<br> Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitā, xlvii. 7;<br> and [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 8, 11 (see Delbrück. ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 579 ''et seq.''), where bodily defects (bad nails and discoloured teeth), marrying a younger daughter when her elder sister was unmarried, are coupled with murder, though not equated with it. See also Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 11, 5, where Aśvapati's list of sinners includes a drinker of intoxicating liquor, a thief, and one who does not maintain a sacrificial fire.</ref> The crimes enumerated include the slaying of an embryo (''bhrūṇa''),<ref name=fx5_ve1_1432> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 10, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxvii. 9;<br> xxxi. 7;<br> Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitā, xli. 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 8, 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 7, 8;<br> 8, 3;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1, 22;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 27;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 1. ''Cf.'' Av. vi. 112, 3;<br> 113, 2;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 481;<br> 10, 66;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 522;<br> ''American Journal of Philology,'' 17, 430.</ref> the slaying of a man (''[[वीर|vīra]]''),<ref name=fx6_ve1_1432> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]], xxxi. 7;<br> Kapiṣṭhala, ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Maitrāyaṇī, ''loc. cit.;<br>'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 5, and ''cf.'' '''[[वैर|Vaira]].''' For cases of justifiable homicide, see, ''e.g.,'' [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 15-18. ''Cf.'' also the story of '''[[वृश जान|Vṛśa Jāna]]''' in [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 12, where the death of a boy by careless driving is mentioned, and the king is reproached for it by his [[पुरोहित|Purohita]]. They dispute as to the guilt, and, according to one version (see Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 66, 67), the '''Ikṣvākus''' decide that the action was sinful, and required expiation.</ref> and  the slaying of a Brahmin,<ref name=fx7_ve1_1432> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 1, 2;<br> v. 3, 12, 1;<br> vi. 5, 10, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxi. 7 (where the Kapiṣṭhala has ''[[ब्रह्म-ज्य|brahma-jya]],'' ‘oppressor of a Brahmin’);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 8, 12. The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, x. 38, declares that the slaying of a Brahmin alone is truly murder, and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 1, 1 ''et seq.,'' states that the sin of murdering a Brahmin can be expiated only by the performance of an [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or ‘horse sacrifice’--the ''ne plus ultra'' of human generosity to Brahmins. See also [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 27. The later tradition also interprets ''bhrūṇa'' as Brahmin (see Saṅkara, cited in Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 410, n.;<br> Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 30, n. 5;<br> Konow, ''Sāmavidhāna [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],'' 46, n. 1, and ''cf.'' [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xx. 23).</ref> a much more serious crime. Treachery is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx8_ve1_1432> xiv. 6, 8, the story of '''[[कुत्स|Kutsa]].'''</ref> as being punishable by death, as it was punished later.<ref name=fx9_ve1_1432> Jolly, ''op. cit.,'' 127.</ref> But there is no trace of an organized criminal justice vested either in the king or in the people. There still seems to have prevailed the system of wergeld ('''[[वैर|Vaira]]'''), which indicates that criminal justice remained in the hands of those who were wronged. In the Sūtras,<ref name=fx10_ve1_1432> See references in Bühler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 14, 345.</ref> on the other hand, the king's peace is recognized as infringed by crimes, a penalty being paid to him, or, according to the Brahminical textbooks, to the Brahmins. It may there-  fore reasonably be conjectured that the royal power of jurisdiction steadily increased; the references in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] to the king as wielding punishment ('''[[दण्ड|Daṇḍa]]''') confirm this supposition. Whether, as the analogy of other systems suggests, the king was assisted in his judicial duties, as he undoubtedly was later, by assessors, presumably of the Brahmin caste, cannot be made out clearly.<ref name=fx11_ve1_1432> Compare the story of the death of the child killed by Tryaruṇa, and the decision of the Ikṣväkus referred to in n. 6 above, and the notice in [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxvii. 4, that a [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] is ''adhyakṣa,'' when a Sūdra is punished (''han'').</ref><br><br>The procedure adopted in deciding cases is quite uncertain. In the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx12_ve1_1432> vi. 16. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 72, 73.</ref> the ordeal of the red-hot axe is mentioned as applied in an accusation of theft. It must apparently be understood to have been inflicted by the direction of the king. But no other judicial ordeal is known to Vedic literature (see '''[[दिव्य|Divya]]'''). The punishment of theft was in some cases at least death, probably when the thief was taken redhanded;<ref name=fx13_ve1_1432> [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 43;<br> Āpastamba [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 9, 25, 4.</ref> in other cases binding to posts was the penalty,<ref name=fx14_ve1_1432> See Av. xix. 47, 9;<br> 50, 1, and '''[[तस्कर|Taskara]].'''</ref> presumably accompanied by the return of the stolen goods. In the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx15_ve1_1432> v. 10, 9. Another list is given in [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, x. 65, which includes slaying a Brahmin, defiling a Guru's bed, stealing a cow, drinking [[सुरा|Surā]], and killing an embryo, along with irregularities in offering a Śrāddha, ‘water offering to the dead.’ ''Cf.'' also [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 27, for a list of seven. Many more appear in the Sāmavidhāna [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], but that work cannot claim to be a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] proper.</ref> the list of sins given as apparently equal in wickedness is stealing gold, drinking spirits, defiling a Guru's bed, and the murder of a Brahmin.<br><br>(2) ''Civil Law.''--There is little recorded as to civil law in Vedic literature. The relations of the family and the question of family property are dealt with under '''[[उर्वरा|Urvarā]], [[क्षेत्र|Kṣetra]], Pati;''' succession and partition of property are treated under '''[[दाय|Dāya]].''' As regards the transfer of chattels--for land as transferable ''inter vivos'' is hardly yet recognized, save exceptionally as a sacrificial fee ('''[[दक्षिणा|Dakṣiṇā]]'''), and then disapproved<ref name=fx16_ve1_1432> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 7, 1, 13.</ref> --the recognized modes are gift ('''[[दान|Dāna]]''') and barter or sale ('''[[क्रय|Kraya]]'''), which includes exchange. Original acquisition of land was no doubt brought  about by occupation and apportionment among the tribesmen,<ref name=fx17_ve1_1432> ''Cf.'' Cæsar, ''Bellum Gallicum,'' iv. 1;<br> vi. 22;<br> Tacitus, ''Germania,'' 26, for Germany;<br> Mommsen, ''Ro7misches Staatsrecht,'' 3, 1, 21, for the Roman ''hortus;<br>'' and the Greek , Lang, ''Homer and the Epic,'' 236-241;<br> Ridgeway, ''Journal of Hellenic Studies,'' 6, 319 ''et seq.;<br>'' Grote, ''History of Greece,'' 2, 36, 37. See also Pollock and Maitland, ''History of English Law,'' 2, 337 ''et seq.;<br>'' Baden Powell, ''Village Communities in India,'' 6 ''et seq.;<br>'' 131.</ref> while chattels were acquired by taking possession of them, provided that they were found on one's own land or on unoccupied land, and did not belong to any other person originally. The Sūtras<ref name=fx18_ve1_1432> [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 36 ''et seq.''</ref> contain rules for the disposal of lost property, which tend to give it to the king, with the deduction of a percentage for the finder, unless the latter is a Brahmin, who keeps it all. As for contract, save in regard to moneylending (for which see '''[[ऋण|Ṛṇa]]'''), practically nothing is to be gathered from Vedic literature, doubtless because of the primitive conditions prevailing in that early period. Much of the labour, which would in a more developed society have been done by workers for hire, would be performed by slaves (''cf.'' '''[[दास|Dāsa]], [[शूद्र|Śūdra]]'''), while the technical workers of the village--of whom long lists are given in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx19_ve1_1432> xxx.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx20_ve1_1432> iii. 4. See Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 426 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 75 ''et seq.''</ref> --may have been recompensed not by any sum based on each piece of work done, but by fixed allowances, much as the village servants are in modern times.<ref name=fx21_ve1_1432> ''Cf.'' Maine, ''Village Communities,'' 127, 175;<br> Baden Powell, ''op. cit.,'' 124 ''et seq.;<br>'' Grote, ''History of Greece,'' 2, 36, n. 2.</ref> But this must remain a matter of conjecture, and it is uncertain what exact status the carpenter or smith held in the village. Similarly it is impossible to trace in the early literature any legal theory or practice as to torts, but rules as to penalties for insults appear in the Sūtras.<ref name=fx22_ve1_1432> ''Cf.'' Jolly, ''op. cit.,'' 126-128.</ref><br><br>Very little is recorded as to procedure. The list<ref name=fx23_ve1_1432> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 10;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 6, 1.</ref> of victims at the Puruṣamedha, or ‘horse sacrifice,’ includes a ''praśnin,'' an ''[[अभि-प्रश्निन्|abhi-praśnin]],'' and a ''[[प्रश्न|praśna]]-vivāka,'' in whom it is not unreasonable to see the plaintiff, the defendant, and the arbitrator or judge: the terms may refer to what is probably an early  form of judicial procedure, a voluntary arbitration. The same idea may be conveyed by the word ''[[मध्यम-शी|madhyama-śī]],'' ‘lying in the midst,’ which occurs in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx24_ve1_1432> x. 97, 12 = Av. iv. 9, 4 = Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xii. 86. ''Madhyamaśīvan,'' in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 408, is of quite doubtful sense.</ref> and which Roth,<ref name=fx25_ve1_1432> ''Siebenzig Lieder,'' 174. This fact renders doubtful Lanman's view (Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 159) that the St. Petersburg Dictionary, in giving ''intercessor'' as the interpretation, did not mean ‘mediator,’ but ‘adversary.’</ref> followed by Zimmer,<ref name=fx26_ve1_1432> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 180.</ref> understood to mean an arbitrator or judge, the expression being derived from the judge acting with other judicial persons,<ref name=fx27_ve1_1432> As, apparently, in early Germany. See Cæsar, ''Bellum Gallicum,'' vi. 23;<br> Tacitus, ''Germania,'' 11, 12;<br> Coulanges, ''Recherches sur quelques problèmes d'histoire,'' 361 ''et seq.''</ref> and being surrounded by the assembly of the people. But this interpretation is uncertain; Whitney<ref name=fx28_ve1_1432> See n. 25.</ref> thinks that the word merely alludes to a chief round whom his men encamp. The king is later the chief civil judge, and may presumably have been so earlier, no doubt in conjunction with the elders of the tribe, but for this we are reduced to conjecture.<ref name=fx29_ve1_1432> ''Cf.'' the later [[परिषद्|Pariṣad]], [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxviii. 48, 49;<br> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 1, 7-16;<br> [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xi. 5-7, 20;<br> Jolly, ''op. cit.,'' 132 ''et seq.'' The parallels from other Āryan peoples suggest the use of assessors, as in the Anglo-Saxon courts of the shire and hundred. ''Cf.'' Sohm, ''Altdeutsches Reichs-und Gerichtsverfassung,'' 6 ''et seq.''</ref><br><br>The use of witnesses as evidence is uncertain (see '''[[ज्ञातृ|Jñātṛ]]'''), and the ordeal is not recorded as deciding any civil matter except the dispute between '''[[वत्स|Vatsa]]''' and his rival as to the true Brahminical descent of the former, which was settled by his walking unharmed through the flame of a fire.<ref name=fx30_ve1_1432> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 6, 6.</ref> But it is probable on analogy that the ordeal may have been used for the purpose of deciding disputes. Whether the oath was so used cannot be certainly shown. It appears, however, that a Brahmin was preferred in legal matters to a non-Brahmin.<ref name=fx31_ve1_1432> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 11, 9, which seems to refer either to giving evidence for or passing judgment on a case when both a Brahmin and a nonBrahmin are engaged.</ref><br><br>There are very few references to police officials: no doubt the king employed some of his dependents to execute sentences and arrest offenders (see '''Ugra, [[जीवगृभ्|Jīvagṛbh]]''').<br><br>(3) ''Morality.''--It is convenient to notice under this head  several points bearing on the moral condition of the people: (''a'') the exposure of children; (''b'') the exposure of the aged; (''c'') prostitution; (''d'') adultery; (''e'') incest.<br><br>(''a'') The exposure of girl infants is asserted by Zimmer<ref name=fx32_ve1_1432> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 319, 320. ''Cf.'' also Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 54, 260;<br> Kaegi, ''Der Rigveda,'' n. 49;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 389, 390;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda. 6, 142;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 48.</ref> on the strength of a passage in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx33_ve1_1432> xxvii. 9. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 10, 3;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 17, 12;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] iii. 4.</ref> but it seems clear that the passage has been misunderstood,<ref name=fx34_ve1_1432> Bo7htlingk, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 44, 494496. The traditional rendering of the passages is not that it refers to exposure, but to getting rid of a daughter on her marriage.</ref> and that it refers merely to laying the child aside, not exposing it, while a boy was lifted up. It is, however, true that the birth of a girl was not at all popular, not an unnatural sentiment in an early society, and paralleled among other Āryan peoples.<ref name=fx35_ve1_1432> Av. viii. 6, 25;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 15;<br> Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 409;<br> Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 320;<br> Schrader, ''op. cit.,'' 390.</ref><br><br>(''b'') The exposure of the aged is also inferred by Zimmer<ref name=fx36_ve1_1432> ''Op. cit.,'' 327, 328. Strabo, pp. 513, 517, 520, reports the practice as prevailing in Iran, Bactria, and the Massagetae;<br> it prevailed among the Norsemen, Weinhold, ''Altuordisches Leben,'' 473, and conceivably among the early Romans (''depontani senes,'' Cicero, ''Pro Roscio,'' 100;<br> but this and other cases may be really instances of the ritual casting into water of the wornout vegetation spirit for the purpose of reviving it). See Kaegi, ''op. cit.,'' n. 50;<br> Schrader, ''op. cit.,'' 379, n.</ref> from a passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx37_ve1_1432> viii. 51, 2.</ref> and from the mention of persons exposed (''ud-hitāḥ'') in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx38_ve1_1432> xviii. 2, 34. See '''[[अन्अग्निदग्ध|Anagnidagdha]].'''</ref> The latter passage may well refer merely to the bodies being exposed after death to the elements (as is done by the Parsis). The former passage merely refers to the individual case of some person who may have been cast out, and proves absolutely nothing as to a habitual or recognized custom, nor can such a custom be inferred from, ''e.g.,'' the legend of '''Cyavāna.'''<br><br>(''c'') That prostitution existed in Rigvedic times is certain, but its extent is disputed. Brotherless girls were frequently reduced to becoming prostitutes;<ref name=fx39_ve1_1432> Rv. i. 124, 7;<br> iv. 5, 5;<br> Av. i. 17, 1;<br> and ''of.'' '''Ayogü.'''</ref> the putting away of an illegitimate child is referred to in the Rigveda;<ref name=fx40_ve1_1432> ii. 29, 1. ''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''op. cit.,'' 26.</ref> besides the  terms ''[[पुंश्चली|puṃścalī]]''<ref name=fx41_ve1_1432> Av. xv. 2, etc.</ref> and ''[[महानग्नी|mahānagnī]],''<ref name=fx42_ve1_1432> Av. xiv. 1, 36;<br> xx. 136, 5 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 27. ''Cf. [[नग्ना|nagnā]]'' in Av. v. 7, 8.</ref> which undoubtedly mean ‘harlot,’ there are other clear references to prostitution;<ref name=fx43_ve1_1432> Rv. i. 167, 4 (Wilson, Translation of the Rigveda, 2, xvii), can hardly be so interpreted;<br> see Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 332, n. Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 277, interprets it as a reference to polyandry, but this is still more doubtful;<br> but see Rv. viii. 17, 7.</ref> and expressions like ''kumārī-[[पुत्र|putra]],'' ‘son of a maiden,’<ref name=fx44_ve1_1432> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 2, 1.</ref> and the ‘son of an unmarried girl’ (''agrū''), spoken of in the Rigveda<ref name=fx45_ve1_1432> iv. 19, 9;<br> 30, 16. 19;<br> ii. 13, 12;<br> 15, 17;<br> Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 334, 335.</ref> as exposed and attacked by animals, point in the same direction. The Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx46_ve1_1432> Apparently this is meant by the epithets ''atiṣkadvarī'' (''apaskadvarī'' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 11, 1), ''atītvarī, vijarjarā,'' in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 15.</ref> seems to recognize prostitution as a profession. Pischel<ref name=fx47_ve1_1432> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, xxv;<br> 196, 275, 299, 309, etc.;<br> 2, 120.</ref> sees many references to Hetairai in the Rigveda, which as Geldner<ref name=fx48_ve1_1432> ''Ibid.,'' 2, 154.</ref> insists reflects in its imagery the court life of Indian princes. But the correctness of the view of these two scholars on this point is not by any means certain.<ref name=fx49_ve1_1432> ''Cf.'' Winternitz, ''Geschichte der indischen Litteratur,'' 1, 60;<br> Jolly, ''op. cit.,'' 48.</ref><br><br>(''d'') Adultery was generally regarded among Āryan peoples as a serious offence against the husband of the woman affected. We accordingly find in the legal literature of India traces of the rule that an adulterer can be slain with impunity if taken in the act.<ref name=fx50_ve1_1432> Leist, ''Altarisches Jus Gentium,'' 276 ''et seq.,'' 309.</ref> Weber,<ref name=fx51_ve1_1432> ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 83 ''et seq.''</ref> however, has adduced some material indicating an indifference to these matters in Vedic times, and Ludwig<ref name=fx52_ve1_1432> ''Op. cit.,'' 5, 573.</ref> has adopted the same view. But, as Delbrück<ref name=fx53_ve1_1432> ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 545 ''et seq.''</ref> has clearly shown, the evidence is not convincing; the cited prescriptions<ref name=fx54_ve1_1432> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 6, 8, 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 7.</ref> forbidding connexion with another man's wife during a certain rite do not imply that such connexion would otherwise be allowed: the ritual of the Varuṇa-praghāsas,<ref name=fx55_ve1_1432> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 10, 11;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 2, 20.</ref> when a wife names her lover or lovers, seems originally to have been a solemn means of banishing the evil brought on a family by a wife's fall; '''Yājñavalkya's''' famous saying<ref name=fx56_ve1_1432> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 1, 21.</ref> that no one  cares whether a wife is ‘unchaste’ (''paraḥ-puṃsā'') or not is a mere mistranslation,<ref name=fx57_ve1_1432> So Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Delbrück, ''op. cit.,'' 548.</ref> the expression ''paraḥ-puṃsā'' really meaning ‘removed from the male persons.’ And the uncertainty asserted in some passages<ref name=fx58_ve1_1432> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 4, 11;<br> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], cited in Ludwig, ''loc. cit.''</ref> as to origin from a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] is not a sign of doubtful descent, but is due to the fact that Ṛṣihood was a difficult matter to ascertain. None the less woman's position was lowered by the prevalence of polygamy, and such stories as that of Ahalyā and Indra<ref name=fx59_ve1_1432> ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 65.</ref> are not compatible with a very high standard of morality. A similar conclusion is pointed to by references in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]]<ref name=fx60_ve1_1432> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 19, 2. 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 30. 31.</ref> to relations between the [[आर्य|Ārya]] man and the [[शूद्रा|Śūdrā]] woman, and by a spell given in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx61_ve1_1432> vi. 4, 11.</ref> to expiate relations with the wife of a [[श्रोत्रिय|Śrotriya]] (Brahmin theologian).<br><br>(''e'') Incest was recognized in the marriage of brother and sister as appears from the legend of Yama and Yamī in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx62_ve1_1432> x. 10.</ref> which clearly shows that such a marriage was not approved by the feeling of the Vedic age. There is also another hymn<ref name=fx63_ve1_1432> x. 162, 5.</ref> in which reference to such intercourse appears to be made. Mention is further made in the Rigveda<ref name=fx64_ve1_1432> x. 61, 5-7.</ref> to the wedlock of Prajāpati and his daughter, which is, however, interpreted mythologically in the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx65_ve1_1432> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 33;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 4, 1;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 4, 46, 47;<br> Max Müller, ''op. cit.,'' 529, 530.</ref> an interpretation which may be correct. That incest, however, actually did take place is clear from the Atharvaveda;<ref name=fx66_ve1_1432> viii. 6, 7.</ref> but even though the mythological interpretation of the passage were not justified, no conclusion could be drawn from the hymn as to the normal occurrence of such relations.

धव
<u>'''1. Dhava'''</u> is the name of a tree (''Grislea tormentosa'') mentioned, together with the '''[[प्लक्ष|Plakṣa]], [[अश्वत्थ|Aśvattha]],''' and '''Khādira,''' in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1433> v. 5, 5;<br> xx. 137, 11. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 62.</ref> 

धव
<u>'''2. Dhava,'''</u> ‘man,’ is not found before the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1434> iii. 15. ''Cf.'' Naighaṇṭuka, ii. 3.</ref> The word clearly owes its existence merely to ''[[विधवा|vidhavā]],'' ‘widow,’ wrongly interpreted as ''vi-dhavā,'' ‘without a husband.’

धवित्र
<u>'''Dhavitra,'''</u> occurring in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1435> xiv. 1, 3, 30;<br> 3, 1, 21.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1435> v. 4, 33.</ref> denotes a ‘fan’ of hide or leather for blowing the sacrificial fire.

धानं-जय्य
<u>'''Dhānaṃ-jayya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Dhanaṃ-jaya,'''’ is the patronymic of '''[[अंशु|Aṃśu]]''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1436> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373. Under this patronymic he is frequently named by Lāṭyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 1, 25;<br> ii. 1, 2;<br> 9, 10, etc. (misread Dhānaṃjapya in many manuscripts). ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 76, 77, 82.</ref>

धाना
<u>'''Dhānā,'''</u> always used in the plural, and frequently referred to in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1437> i. 16, 2;<br> iii. 35, 3;<br> 52, 5;<br> vi. 29, 4, etc.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1437> Av. xviii. 3, 69;<br> 4, 32. 34;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 21, 22;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 11, 2, etc.</ref> means ‘grains of corn.’ They were sometimes parched (''bhṛjj''),<ref name=fx3_ve1_1437> Rv. iv. 24, 7.</ref> and were regularly mixed with Soma.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1437> Rv. iii. 43, 4;<br> 52, 1;<br> viii. 91, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 10, 2;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 4, 3, 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prchistoric Antiquities,'' 283.</ref>

धान्य
<u>'''Dhānya'''</u> (neut.), a derivative from the preceding word,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1438> Primarily as an adjective, ‘consisting of grain.’</ref> denotes ‘grain’ in general. It is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1438> vi. 13, 4.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1438> Av. iii. 24, 2. 4;<br> v. 29, 7;<br> vi. 50, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 8;<br> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, etc.</ref> According to the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx4_ve1_1438> vi. 3, 22 (Mādhyaṃdina = 13 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> there are ten cultivated (''grāmyāṇi'') kinds of grain: rice and barley (''vrīhiyavāḥ''), sesamum and beans (''tila-māṣāḥ''), Panicum Miliaceum and Italicum (''[[अणु|aṇu]]-priyaṅgavaḥ''), maize (''godhūmāḥ''), lentils (''masūrāḥ''), Khalvāḥ and Dolichos uniflorus (''[[खल|khala]]-kulāḥ''). The  horse is called ‘corn-eating’ (''dhānyāda'') in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_1438> viii. 21.</ref> and Śatapatha<ref name=fx6_ve1_1438> xiii. 5, 4, 2.</ref> Brāhmaṇas, and men are mentioned as ‘purifying corn’ (''dhānyā-kṛt'') in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx8_ve1_1438> x. 94, 13.</ref>(**  7 Lit., ‘preparing corn.’

धान्व
<u>'''Dhānva'''</u> is the patronymic of '''[[असित|Asita]]''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1439> xiii. 4, 3, 11;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 7.</ref> In the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1439> xvi. 2, 20.</ref> the form of the name is Dhānvana.

धामन्
<u>'''Dhāman'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1440> i. 144, 1;<br> ii. 3, 2;<br> iii. 55, 10;<br> vii. 61, 4;<br> 87, 2;<br> x. 13, 1, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1440> Av. iv. 25, 7;<br> vii. 68, 1;<br> xii. 1, 52;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iv. 34;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 7, 2.</ref> ‘dwelling’ and ‘house,’ or sometimes<ref name=fx3_ve1_1440> Rv. viii. 101, 6;<br> ix. 63, 14;<br> x. 82, 3;<br> Av. ii. 14, 6. Many of the examples given in the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v., C,'' are doubtful.</ref> its inmates. The word is also<ref name=fx4_ve1_1440> Rv. iv. 55, 2;<br> vi. 21, 3;<br> vii. 63, 3;<br> viii. 41, 10;<br> x. 48, 11.</ref> found in the sense of ‘ordinance,’ ‘law,’ expressing much the same as '''Dharman,''' especially in conjunction<ref name=fx5_ve1_1440> Rv. i. 123, 9;<br> iv. 7, 7;<br> vii. 36, 5;<br> x. 124, 3.</ref> with Rta, ‘eternal order.’ Hillebrandt<ref name=fx6_ve1_1440> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 446.</ref> sees in one passage<ref name=fx7_ve1_1440> Rv. ix. 66, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 92, 93.</ref> the sense of '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''

धारा
<u>'''Dhārā'''</u> denotes the ‘edge’ of a weapon,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1441> Rv. vi. 3, 5;<br> 47, 10. ''Cf.'' viii. 73, 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iv. 38, 1, for metaphorical applications.</ref> as of an axe (''[[स्वधिति|svadhiti]]''),<ref name=fx2_ve1_1441> [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 44.</ref> or of a razor (''[[क्षुर|kṣura]]'').<ref name=fx3_ve1_1441> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 3, 2.</ref> See also '''Asi.'''

धिषणा
<u>'''Dhiṣaṇā,'''</u> according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, denotes<ref name=fx1_ve1_1442> Rv. i. 96, 1;<br> 102, 1;<br> 109, 3, 4;<br> iii. 49, 1;<br> iv. 34, 1;<br> 36, 8;<br> viii. 61, 9;<br> ix. 59, 2;<br> x. 17, 12;<br> 30, 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, i. 19;<br> vi. 26, 35, etc.</ref> an implement used in preparing the Soma, ‘bowl’ or ‘vat,’ and by metonymy also the Soma draught itself.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1442> Rv. i. 102, 7;<br> iii. 32, 14;<br> 49, 4;<br> vi. 19, 2;<br> vii. 90, 3;<br> viii. 15, 7;<br> x. 96, 10, etc.</ref> The dual, by  a metaphor,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1442> Like '''[[चमू|Camū]].'''</ref> also expresses the ‘two worlds,’ heaven and earth.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1442> Rv. i. 160, 1;<br> vi. 8, 3;<br> 50, 3;<br> 70, 3;<br> x. 44, 8;<br> in the plural, ‘the three worlds,’ Rv. v. 69, 2. In other passages, Rv. i. 22, 10;<br> iii. 56, 6;<br> v. 41, 8;<br> vi. 11, 3;<br> x. 35, 7, the sense of ‘a genius of prosperity’ was assigned to [[धिषणा|Dhiṣaṇā]] by Roth.</ref> Hillebrandt,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1442> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 175-181.</ref> however, thinks that the word properly means earth,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1442> Rv. i. 22, 10;<br> 96, 1;<br> 102, 1;<br> iii. 31, 13;<br> 56, 6;<br> vi. 19, 2;<br> vii. 90, 3;<br> viii. 15, 7;<br> x. 30, 6;<br> 35, 7;<br> 96, 10.</ref> in the dual heaven and earth,<ref name=fx7_ve1_1442> See n. 3;<br> also Rv. viii. 61, 2;<br> ''[[निविद्|nivid]]'' in Sāṅkhāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 19, 4.</ref> in the plural the triad, earth, atmosphere, and heaven,<ref name=fx8_ve1_1442> Rv. iv. 36, 8;<br> v. 69, 2;<br> ix. 59, 2.</ref> while in some passages<ref name=fx9_ve1_1442> Rv. i. 109, 3, 4;<br> iii. 2, 1;<br> 49, 4 (or perhaps ‘earth’);<br> iv. 34, 1;<br> v. 41, 8;<br> vi. 11, 3;<br> x. 17, 12.</ref> [[धिषणा|Dhiṣaṇā]] denotes the Vedi, the excavated ground used as an altar. This is not, however, certain, while it seems clear that the Vājasaneyi<ref name=fx10_ve1_1442> vii. 26.</ref> and [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]]<ref name=fx11_ve1_1442> iii. 1, 10, 1.</ref> Saṃhitās understand the Dhiṣaṇās (dual) to be the planks over which the pressing of the Soma took place (''[[अधिषवण|adhiṣavaṇa]]-phalake'').<ref name=fx12_ve1_1442> Mahīdhara on Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vii. 26;<br> Sāyaṇa on [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> Pischel<ref name=fx13_ve1_1442> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 82-87. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 124;<br> Oldenberg, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 46, 120-122.</ref> sees in [[धिषणा|Dhiṣaṇā]] a goddess of wealth akin to Aditi and the earth.

धी
<u>'''Dhī,'''</u> ‘thought,’ is used several times in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1443> i. 3, 5;<br> 135, 5;<br> 151, 6;<br> 185, 8;<br> ii. 3, 8 (where it is connected with '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]''');<br> 40, 5, etc.</ref> to denote the ‘prayer’ or ‘hymn of praise’ of the singer. One poet speaks of himself as ‘weaving’ such a prayer,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1443> Rv. ii. 28, 5.</ref> while another refers to his ‘ancient ancestral hymn,’ which he refurbishes presumably for use.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1443> Rv. iii. 39, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 338.</ref>

धीति
<u>'''Dhīti'''</u> has in several passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1444> i. 110, 1;<br> iii. 12, 7;<br> 52, 6;<br> v. 25, 3;<br> 53, 11;<br> vi. 15, 9, etc.;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 24.</ref> practically the same sense as '''[[धी|Dhī]],''' ‘prayer,’ or ‘hymn of praise.’

धीर शात-पर्णेय
<u>'''Dhīra Śāta-parṇeya'''</u> (‘descendant of Śataparṇa’) is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (x. 3, 3, 1) as a pupil of '''[[महाशाल|Mahāśāla]].''' <br>==Foot Notes==

धीवन्
<u>'''Dhīvan'''</u> occurs in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1446> iii. 5, 6.</ref> where it may either be taken with Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1446> St. Petersbuig Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> Bloomfield,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1446> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 114.</ref> and Whitney<ref name=fx4_ve1_1446> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 114.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indīsche Studien,'' 17, 194 ''et seq.;<br>'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 252.</ref> as an epithet of ‘chariot-builders’ (''[[रथ|ratha]]-kārāḥ''), meaning ‘clever,’ or be construed with the scholiast as denoting ‘fishermen’ (''dhīvara''). The Paippalāda recension has ''takṣāṇaḥ,'' ‘carpenters.’

धुङ्क्षा
<u>'''Dhuṅkṣā'''</u> is the name of some sort of bird in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or ‘horse sacrifice,’ in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1447> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 12;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 31. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 93.</ref> See also '''[[धूङ्क्ष्णा|Dhūṅkṣṇā]]''' and '''[[ध्वाङ्क्ष|Dhvāṅkṣa]].'''

धुनि
<u>'''Dhuni'''</u> is the name of a foe of Indra, normally mentioned along with '''[[चुमुरि|Cumuri]]''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1448> ii. 15, 9;<br> vi. 18, 8;<br> 20, 13;<br> vii. 19, 4.</ref> He and [[चुमुरि|Cumuri]] seem to have been opposed to '''[[दभीति|Dabhīti]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1448> Rv. x. 113. 9.</ref> His name is probably that of an aboriginal chief.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1448> Wackernagel, ''Altindische Grammatik,'' 1, xxii;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 162. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 157, 158.</ref>

धुर्
<u>'''Dhur'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1449> i. 84, 16;<br> 100, 16;<br> 134, 3;<br> 164, 19;<br> ii. 18, 7;<br> iii. 35, 2;<br> v. 55. 6;<br> vii. 34, 4, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1449> Av. v. 17, 18;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] vi. 18;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 2 10;<br> 4, 4, 13, etc.;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka i. 5, 2 (the Dhur is the end), etc.</ref> denotes, according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, that part of the yoke which is placed on the shoulders of the animals drawing the chariot or cart, whence they are called ''dhūr-ṣāh,'' ‘yoke-bearing,’ in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1449> iv. 33. ''Cf.'' '''Uara.'''</ref> In one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_1449> v. 43. 8.</ref> the sense is uncertain: Roth<ref name=fx5_ve1_1449> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' 2.</ref> takes it to mean the pin at either end of the axle ('''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]]''') which goes through the nave of the wheel, and would thus be equivalent to '''[[आणि|Āṇi]],''' and Oldenberg<ref name=fx6_ve1_1449> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 339;<br> Griffith. ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 508. The ''akṣadhurau'' are mentioned in the Āpastamba Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xi. 6, 5;<br> Kātyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 3, 22. ''Cf.'' Caland and Henry. ''L'Agniṣṭoma,'' 31.</ref>  seems to adopt the same view. Monier Williams<ref name=fx7_ve1_1449> Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> seems to think that ‘load’ is meant, but this is not probable. It is possible that Dhur has the sense of ‘pole,’<ref name=fx8_ve1_1449> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 246. Later, the word means the ‘end of the pole,’ a sense already found in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka (n. 2). This modification of meaning seems to be due to the fact that the yoke is at the end of the pole. See also '''[[धूर्षद्|Dhūrṣad]].'''</ref> and then more generally still the pole and the axle together regarded as the drawing part of the chariot: this might explain the use in the doubtful passage of the Rigveda.

धूङ्क्ष्णा
<u>'''Dhūṅkṣṇā'''</u> is the form in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1450> v. 5, 19, 1. Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 93, gives the form as Dhūṅkṣṇa. perhaps in error. ''Cf.'' also '''[[ध्वाङ्क्ष|Dhvāṅkṣa]].'''</ref> of the name of the bird elsewhere found as '''[[धुङ्क्षा|Dhuṅkṣā]].''' It is glossed as ‘white crow’ (''śveta-kākī'').

धूम-केतु
<u>'''Dhūma-ketu,'''</u> ‘smoke-bannered,’ is an epithet of [[मृत्यु|Mṛtyu]], ‘death,’ in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1451> xix. 9, 10.</ref> Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve1_1451> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 358.</ref> thinks that a comet is meant, but Whitney<ref name=fx3_ve1_1451> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 914.</ref> considers this extremely improbable. Lanman<ref name=fx4_ve1_1451> ''Ibid.''</ref> plausibly suggests that the smoke of the funeral pile is referred to.

धूम्र
<u>'''Dhūmra'''</u> in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (i. 8, 21, 1) denotes ‘camel’ according to Bo7htlingk's Dictionary.<br>==Foot Notes==

धूर्-षद्
<u>'''Dhūr-ṣad'''</u> means, according to Roth,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1453> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> ‘standing under the yoke’ and so ‘burden-bearing,’ and thus metaphorically ‘promoting,’ in the passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1453> i. 143, 7;<br> ii. 2, 1;<br> 34, 4 (but ''cf.'' Pischel. ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 301). In x. 132, 7, Roth renders ‘resting on the yoke.’</ref> where it occurs. More probable, however, is the view<ref name=fx3_ve1_1453> ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 237 ''et seq.;<br>'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 195.</ref> that it means ‘sitting on the pole,’ that is, ‘charioteer,’ with reference to the fact that  to get near his horses the charioteer might well go forward and sit on the pole or even on the yoke.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1453> ''Cf.'' Mahābhārata, viii. 617: ''dhuryān dhuryagatān sūtān.''</ref>

धृत-राष्ट्र
<u>'''1. Dhṛta-rāṣṭra'''</u> (‘having his kingdom firmly established’) is the name of a snake demon with the patronymic '''[[ऐरावत|Airāvata]],''' ‘descendant of '''Irāvant,'''’ in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1454> viii. 10, 29.</ref> and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1454> xxv. 15, 3. ''Cf.'' Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 26, 15;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17. 257.</ref>

धृतराष्ट्र वैचित्र-वीर्य
<u>'''2. Dhṛtarāṣṭra Vaicitra-vīrya'''</u> (‘descendant of Vicitravīrya’) is mentioned in a passage of the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1455> x. 6. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 469 ''et seq.''</ref> which is, unhappily, far from intelligible. But there is no ground for supposing that he was a Kuru-[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]] king; he seems rather to have lived at some distance from the KuruPañcālas. There is no good reason to deny his identity<ref name=fx2_ve1_1455> As does Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 90, 114, 125;<br> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 7, 8. Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' treats them as identical.</ref> with the [[धृतराष्ट्र|Dhṛtarāṣṭra]] of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_1455> xiii. 5, 4, 22.</ref> king of '''[[काशि|Kāśi]],''' who was defeated, when he attempted to offer a horse sacrifice, by '''[[सात्राजित|Sātrājita]] Śatānīka.''' The fact that the latter was a '''[[भरत|Bharata]]''' also points to Dhṛtarāṣṭra's not having been a Kuru-[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]] at all. In the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā he appears as having a dispute with '''Vaka [[दाल्भि|Dālbhi]];''' but even assuming that the latter was a [[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]], there is nothing to hint that the former was a Kuru or that this dispute is a sign of an early hostility of Kuru and [[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_1455> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 831 ''et seq.'' This argument is independent of the identification of the two Dhṛtarāṣṭras, but is confirmed by it.</ref> It is true that in the Epic '''Śantanu''' and Vicitravīrya and [[धृतराष्ट्र|Dhṛtarāṣṭra]] himself are all connected, but this connexion seems to be due, as so often in the Epic, to a confused derangement of great figures of the past.

धृष्टि
<u>'''Dhṛṣṭi,'''</u> found in the dual in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1456> v. 9, 8.</ref> the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_1456> xiv. 3, 1, 22.</ref> and the Sūtras,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1456> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxvi. 2, 10, etc.</ref> seems to denote ‘firetongs.’ 

धेना
<u>'''Dhenā'''</u> denotes a ‘milch cow,’<ref name=fx1_ve1_1457> Rv. iii. 34, 3 (Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 61);<br> v. 62, 2. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 114.</ref> or in the plural, ‘draughts of milk.’<ref name=fx2_ve1_1457> Rv. iii. 1, 9;<br> iv. 58, 6, etc.</ref> In two passages<ref name=fx3_ve1_1457> i. 101, 10;<br> v. 30, 9.</ref> Roth<ref name=fx4_ve1_1457> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> takes the word to mean ‘mare,’ and in another the ‘team’ of Vāyu's chariot. Benfey,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1457> ''Orient und Occident,'' 3, 130.</ref> on the other hand, renders it ‘lips’ in one passage,<ref name=fx7_ve1_1457> Rv. i. 101. 10.</ref> with Sāyaṇa and with Durga's commentary on the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]].<ref name=fx8_ve1_1457> vi. 17. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 249.</ref> Geldner<ref name=fx9_ve1_1457> ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 35-43;<br> 166;<br> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 95.</ref> assigns to the word the senses of ‘lips,’<ref name=fx10_ve1_1457> Rv. i. 101. 10;<br> iii. 1, 9.</ref> ‘speech,’<ref name=fx11_ve1_1457> Rv. iv. 58, 6;<br> i. 55, 4;<br> 141, 1;<br> viii. 32, 22;<br> x. 104, 3. 10.</ref> ‘cow,’<ref name=fx12_ve1_1457> Rv. v. 62, 2, and Vāyu's cow of plenty, i. 2, 3.</ref> ‘beloved,’<ref name=fx13_ve1_1457> Rv. v. 30, 9.</ref> and ‘streams.’<ref name=fx14_ve1_1457> Rv. vii. 21, 3;<br> iii. 34, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 441, 442.</ref>(**  5) Rv. i. 2, 3.

धेनु
<u>'''Dhenu'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1458> i. 32, 9 (''saha-vatsā,'' ‘with her calf’);<br> 134, 4;<br> ii. 2, 2;<br> 34, 8;<br> vi. 135, 8, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1458> Av. v. 17, 18;<br> vii. 104. 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 2, 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 4, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 27;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 1, 21, etc.</ref> means ‘milch cow,’ which is often mentioned with special reference to the production of milk,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1458> Rv. vii. 33. 22;<br> viii. 14, 3;<br> Av. iv. 34, 8 (''kāma-[[दुघा|dughā]],'' ‘milking desires,’ the later ‘cow of plenty’ of the Epic);<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 8, 2, 2.</ref> and is contrasted with the ‘bull’ (''[[वृषभ|vṛṣabha]],''<ref name=fx4_ve1_1458> Rv. x. 5, 7.</ref> ''[[पुमांस्|pumāṃs]],''<ref name=fx5_ve1_1458> Av. xi. 1, 34.</ref> ''[[अनड्वाह्|anaḍvāh]]'').<ref name=fx6_ve1_1458> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 27;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 2, 21.</ref> In the plural<ref name=fx7_ve1_1458> Rv. iv. 22, 6;<br> viii. 2, 6;<br> 4, 8;<br> ix. 61, 21;<br> 72, 1, etc.</ref> the word denotes ‘draughts of milk.’ The derivative, ''dhenukā,'' means merely ‘female.’<ref name=fx8_ve1_1458> Av. iii. 23, 4;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]. xxv. 10, 23;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 6, etc.</ref>

धेनु-ष्टरी
<u>'''Dhenu-ṣṭarī'''</u> in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] (xiii. 6) and Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (ii. 5, 4) denotes a cow which has ceased to give milk.<br>==Foot Notes==

धैवर
<u>'''Dhaivara'''</u> means a ‘fisherman,’ as a member of a caste,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1460> This seems to be shown by the patronymic form, ‘descendant of a ''dhīvara.''’</ref> in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha, or ‘human sacrifice,’ in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1460> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 16;<br> Tait tirīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 15, 1.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Dhīvara.''' 

ध्मातृ
<u>'''Dhmātṛ'''</u> (lit. ‘blower’) occurs twice in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1461> v. 9. 5.</ref> in the two forms, ''dhmātā,'' nom. ‘smelter,’ and ''dhmātarī,'' which, according to the Padapāṭha, stands for ''dhmātari,'' a locative probably meaning ‘in the smelting furnace.’<ref name=fx2_ve1_1461> Macdonell, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1893, 446.</ref> Geldner,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1461> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 146, n, 1.</ref> Bartholomae,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1461> ''Indogermanische Forschungen,'' 1, 496. n. 2.</ref> and Oldenburg<ref name=fx5_ve1_1461> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 46, 388.</ref> regard the latter form as a locative infinitive, ‘in the smelting.’ Ludwig<ref name=fx6_ve1_1461> ''Infinitiv im Veda,'' 9;<br> Translation of the Rigveda, 4, 334.</ref> and Neisser<ref name=fx7_ve1_1461> Bezzenberger's ''Beitrāge,'' 20, 40.</ref> think ''dhmātarī'' is a nom. sing. masc. used in the same sense as ''dhmātā.'' Smelting is also clearly referred to,<ref name=fx8_ve1_1461> Rv. iv. 2, 17. In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 1, 3. 5, '''Ayas''' is smelted from the ore (''aśman''), and gold from the Ayas.</ref> and the smelter is described as using the wings of birds (''[[पर्ण|parṇa]] śakunānām'') to fan the flame.<ref name=fx9_ve1_1461> Rv. ix. 112, 2.</ref> That the art was widely applied is shown by the fact that reference is made to arrows with points of '''Ayas,'''<ref name=fx10_ve1_1461> ''Cf.'' '''Īṣu.'''</ref> to kettles which were fashioned of the same metal and could be placed upon a fire,<ref name=fx11_ve1_1461> Rv. v. 30, 15.</ref> and to Soma cups of beaten Ayas.<ref name=fx12_ve1_1461> Rv. ix. 1, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 252;<br> Schrader, ''Prchistoric Antiquities,'' 159.</ref>

ध्राजि
<u>'''Dhrāji'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1462> i. 164. 44;<br> x. 97, 13;<br> 136, 2.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1462> Av. iii. 1, 5;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 2, 17;<br> iv. 9, 5 [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, i 11, 19, etc.</ref> denotes the ‘sweep’ of the wind, referring no doubt to the violent gales which often blow in India devastating the forests, and which figure in the descriptions of the Maruts, or storm gods.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1462> ''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' xxxii. xxiii ''et seq.;<br>'' Macdonell. ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 79.</ref>

ध्रुव
<u>'''Dhruva'''</u> in the Sūtras<ref name=fx1_ve1_1463> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 7, 22;<br> Sāṅkhāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 17, 2 ''et seq.;<br>'' Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 3, 6, etc. It is to be noted that the marriage Mantras, of which we have a great many, do not include any reference to the [[ध्रुव|Dhruva]];<br> but it is not possible to say definitely whether the practice is really an old one or not</ref> denotes the pole star, being mentioned in connexion with the marriage ritual, in which the star is pointed out to the bride as an emblem of constancy. In the  Maitrāyaṇī [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_1463> See Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 15, 289;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 2, 396.</ref> a late work, the movement of the [[ध्रुव|Dhruva]] (''dhruvasya pracalanam'') is mentioned, but this can hardly be interpreted as referring to an actual observed motion of the nominal pole star,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1463> As understood by Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 98, n. 103;<br> Bühler, ''Indian Antiquary,'' 23, 245, n. 21;<br> Jacobi, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 49, 228, n. 2.</ref> but rather to an extraordinary event, such as a destruction of the world, as Cowell understood the expression.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1463> In his edition of the [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], p. 244.</ref> Jacobi<ref name=fx5_ve1_1463> ''Indian Antiquary,'' 23, 157;<br> ''Zeitschrift, loc. cit.,'' 50, 69 ''et seq.;<br> Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 721 ''et seq.;<br>'' 1910, 461 ''et seq.''</ref> sees in the motion of the [[ध्रुव|Dhruva]] the possibility of fixing a date, on the ground that the only star which could have been deemed a pole star, as ‘immovable,’ was one (''a'' Draconis) of the third millenium B.C. But this attempt to extract chronology from the name of the star is of very doubtful validity.<ref name=fx6_ve1_1463> Whitney, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, xc;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 1102;<br> 1910, 465 ''et seq.''</ref>

ध्रुवा
<u>'''Dhruvā,'''</u> ‘fixed,’ as an epithet of '''[[दिश्|Diś]],''' ‘cardinal point,’ denotes the ground under one's feet.(**  1) Av. iii. 27, 5; xii. 3, 59; xv. 6, 1; [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 14 (''cf.'' '''[[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]]'''); Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 9, 25, etc.<br>==Foot Notes==

ध्वज
<u>'''Dhvaja'''</u> occurs twice in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1465> vii. 85, 2;<br> x. 103, 11. In Epic warfare banners are of vast importance -''e.g.,'' Rāmāyaṇa, ii. 67, 26;<br> they were attached to a pole on the chariot, Mahabhārata, vii. 3332, etc. The army was called ''dhvajinī,'' ‘bannered host,’ ''ibid.,'' i. 2875, etc.</ref> in the sense of ‘banner’ used in battle. It is characteristic of Vedic fighting that in both passages reference is made to arrows being discharged and falling on the banners.

ध्वन्य
<u>'''Dhvanya'''</u> is apparently the name of a patron, son of '''Lakṣmaṇa,''' in a hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1466> v. 33, 10. ''Cf.'' Ludwig Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 155.</ref> 

ध्वसन् द्वैत-वन
<u>'''Dhvasan Dvaita-vana'''</u> (‘descendant of Dvitavana’) is the name in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1467> xiii. 5, 4, 9. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 211;<br> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 6.</ref> of the king of the '''Matsyas''' who celebrated an [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or ‘horse sacrifice,’ near the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]].'''

ध्वसन्ति
<u>'''Dhvasanti'''</u> is in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1468> i. 112, 23.</ref> mentioned together with '''[[पुरुषन्ति|Puruṣanti]]''' as having been aided by the Aśvins. There can be no doubt that this is the longer form of the name '''[[ध्वस्र|Dhvasra]],''' which is found with [[पुरुषन्ति|Puruṣanti]] both in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1468> ix. 58. 3 = Sv. ii. 409.</ref> and in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_1468> xiii. 7, 12 (where the dual of [[ध्वस्र|Dhvasra]] appears as a feminine ''Dhvasre'').<br><br>''Cf.'' Sieg. ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 62, 63;<br> Benfey, ''[[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]],'' 105, 126, who is inclined to think that [[ध्वसन्ति|Dhvasanti]] and [[पुरुषन्ति|Puruṣanti]] are names of women.</ref>

ध्वस्र
<u>'''Dhvasra'''</u> is named with '''[[पुरुषन्ति|Puruṣanti]]''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1469> xiii. 7, 12. ''Cf.'' Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 139;<br> Sāṭyāyanaka, ''apud'' Sāyaṇa, on Rv. ix. 58, 3.</ref> as giving gifts to '''[[तरन्त|Taranta]]''' and '''Purumīḍha.''' These two, being kings, could not<ref name=fx2_ve1_1469> [[मानव|Mānava]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] Śāstra, x. 75, 77.</ref> properly accept gifts which Brāhmaṇas alone could accept, but by becoming authors of a verse of the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_1469> ix. 58, 3.</ref> they qualified themselves to accept them. The verse mentions the names in the dual as ''Dhvasrayoḥ Puruṣantyoḥ,'' ‘from the two, [[ध्वस्र|Dhvasra]] and [[पुरुषन्ति|Puruṣanti]].’<ref name=fx4_ve1_1469> Both words are in the dual, as if they were members of a Dvandva compound. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' 261.</ref> In the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_1469> ''Loc. cit.''</ref> the names occur in the dual as ''Dhvasre Puruṣantī,'' a reading which is confirmed by the [[निदान|Nidāna]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx6_ve1_1469> ix. 9.</ref> The former is necessarily a feminine form, though Sāyaṇa, in his comment on the passage, explains it as really an irregular masculine. According to Roth,<ref name=fx7_ve1_1469> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. [[ध्वस्र|dhvasra]].''</ref> the feminine is a corruption based on the dual form in the verse of the Rigveda mentioned above; but the names may be those of women,<ref name=fx8_ve1_1469> The first would in that case be Dhvasrā.</ref> as Benfey<ref name=fx9_ve1_1469> ''[[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]],'' 105. 126, under [[ध्वसन्ति|Dhvasanti]] and [[पुरुषन्ति|Puruṣanti]].</ref>  inclines to believe. Weber<ref name=fx10_ve1_1469> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 27, n. 1.</ref> suggests that the two were demons, but this is, as Sieg<ref name=fx11_ve1_1469> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 62, 63.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 139;<br> Oertel, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 39;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 360, points out that the sense of the Rīgveda passage is quite uncertain, and that the two, [[तरन्त|Taranta]] and [[पुरुमीळ्ह|Purumīḷha]], as they appear in Rv. v. 61, are rather donors than receivers (see, however, verse 9, ''Purumīṭhāya viprāva''). See also Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 232;<br> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noteu,'' 1, 354.</ref> shows, quite unnecessary. [[ध्वस्र|Dhvasra]] is no doubt identical with '''[[ध्वसन्ति|Dhvasanti]].'''

ध्वाङ्क्ष
<u>'''Dhvāṅkṣa,'''</u> ‘crow,’ is mentioned twice in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1470> xi. 9, 9;<br> xii. 4, 8.</ref> and in the Sūtras.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1470> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] xxv. 6, 9. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 88.</ref> Possibly the same bird is meant by the words '''[[धुङ्क्षा|Dhuṅkṣā]]''' and '''Dhūṅksnā.'''

ध्वान्त
<u>'''Dhvānta'''</u> is the name of some wind in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_1471> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 7, 7, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxix. 7.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1471> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 16, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iv. 24, 1;<br> 25, 1.</ref>

नकुल
<u>'''Nakula,'''</u> ‘ichneumon,’ is mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1472> vi. 139, 5.</ref> as being able to cut a snake in two and then join it up again. Its knowledge<ref name=fx2_ve1_1472> Av. viii. 7, 23.</ref> of a remedy against snake poison is also mentioned. The animal figures in the list of sacrificial victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or ‘horse sacrifice,’ in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1472> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 12, 1;<br> 21, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 26. 2;<br> Maītrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 7 In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 3, 18, 1;<br> [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]] Prātiśākhya, xvii. 9, ''[[नकुल|nakula]]'' denotes a colour--no doubt that of the ichneumon.</ref> 

नक्त
<u>'''Nakta,'''</u> ‘night,’ is found frequently in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1473> i. 13, 7;<br> 73, 7;<br> 96, 5;<br> vii. 2, 6;<br> x. 70, 6;<br> adverbially, i. 24, 10;<br> 90, 7;<br> v. 76, 3;<br> vii. 15, 15;<br> 104, 17;<br> viii. 96, 1.</ref> and sometimes later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1473> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 4, 2, adverbially, Av. vi. 128, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 4, 2;<br> xiii. 1, 5, 5, etc.</ref> usually in the adverbial form ''naktaṃ,'' ‘by night’

नक्षत्र
<u>'''Nakṣatra'''</u> is a word of obscure origin and derivation. The Indian interpreters already show a great divergence of opinion as to its primary meaning. The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1474> ii. 1, 2, 18. 19. ''Cf.'' a citation in [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 20.</ref> resolves it into ''na-[[क्षत्र|kṣatra]]'' (‘no power’), explaining it by a legend. The [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1474> ''Loc. cit.,'' and ''of.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> refers it to the root ''nakṣ,'' ‘obtain,’ following the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_1474> i. 5, 2, 5.</ref> Aufrecht<ref name=fx4_ve1_1474> Kuhn's ''Zeitschrift,'' 8, 71, 72. So Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 288, n. 2.</ref> and Weber<ref name=fx5_ve1_1474> ''Naxatra,'' 2, 268.</ref> derived it from ''[[नक्त|nakta]]-tra,'' ‘guardian of night,’ and more recently<ref name=fx6_ve1_1474> Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 74. line 8.</ref> the derivation from ''nak-[[क्षत्र|kṣatra]],'' ‘having rule over night,’ seems to be gaining acceptance. The generic meaning of the word therefore seems to be ‘star.’<br><br>''The Nakṣatras as Stars in the Rigveda and Later.''--The sense of ‘star’ appears to be adequate for all or nearly all the passages in which [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] occurs in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx7_ve1_1474> See i. 50, 2;<br> vii. 86, 1;<br> x. 68, 11;<br> 111, 7;<br> used of the sun itself, vi. 67, 6 (as masculine);<br> vii. 81, 2;<br> x. 88, 13. The sun is allied with them, iii. 54, 19. ''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]]-[[शवस्|śavas]],'' ‘equalling the multitude of the stars,’ is used as an epithet in x. 21, 10. Even in x. 85, 2, where Soma, on the lap of the Nakṣatras, is mentioned, ‘stars’ would do;<br> but, as this hymn refers to two of the later Nakṣatras, ‘lunar mansions’ may well be meant.</ref> The same sense occurs in the later Saṃhitās also: the sun and the Nakṣatras are mentioned together,<ref name=fx8_ve1_1474> Av. vi. 10, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 43;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], x. 1, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iv. 10, 12.</ref> or the sun, the moon, and the Nakṣatras,<ref name=fx9_ve1_1474> Av. vi. 128, 3;<br> xv. 6, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 13, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 29, etc.</ref> or the moon and the Nakṣatras,<ref name=fx10_ve1_1474> Av. v. 24, 10;<br> vi. 86, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 5, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxv. 15;<br> xxxvii. 12;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 21;<br> xxxix. 2, etc.</ref> or the Nakṣatras alone;<ref name=fx11_ve1_1474> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 2, 2, 2;<br> ii 6, 2, 6, etc;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 21 etc.;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], v. 5, and very often elsewhere.</ref>  but there is no necessity to attribute to the word the sense of ‘lunar mansion’ in these passages.<br><br>On the other hand, the names of at least three of the Nakṣatras in the later sense occur in the Rigveda. [[तिष्य|Tiṣya]],<ref name=fx12_ve1_1474> Rv. v. 59, 13;<br> x. 64, 8;<br> Weber, 2, 290.</ref> however, does not seem to be mentioned as a lunar mansion. With '''Aghās''' (plur.) and '''[[अर्जुनी|Arjunī]]''' (dual)<ref name=fx13_ve1_1474> x. 85, 13;<br> Weber, 364-367, and see references under '''[[अघा|Aghā]]''' and '''[[अर्जुनी|Arjunī]].'''</ref> the case is different: it seems probable that they are the later lunar mansions called [[मघास्|Maghās]] (plur.) and [[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]] (dual). The names appear to have been deliberately changed in the Rigveda, and it must be remembered that the hymn in which they occur, the wedding hymn of Sūryā, has no claim to great age.<ref name=fx14_ve1_1474> ''Cf.'' Arnold, ''Vedic Metre,'' 322.</ref> Ludwig<ref name=fx15_ve1_1474> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 184 ''et seq.''</ref> and Zimmer<ref name=fx16_ve1_1474> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 354. ''Cf.'' Tilak, ''Orion,'' 158.</ref> have seen other references to the Nakṣatras as 27 in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx17_ve1_1474> i. 162, 18 (the 34 ribs of the horse = moon, sun, 5 planets, 27 Nakṣatras);<br> x. 55, 3 (34 lights).</ref> but these seem most improbable. Nor do the adjectives ''[[रेवती|revatī]]'' (‘rich’) and ''punarvasā'' (‘bringing wealth again’) in another hymn<ref name=fx18_ve1_1474> x. 19, 1.</ref> appear to refer to the Nakṣatras.<br><br>''The Nakṣatras as Lunar Mansions.''--In several passages of the later Saṃhitās the connexion of the moon and the Nakṣatras is conceived of as a marriage union. Thus in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]]<ref name=fx19_ve1_1474> xi. 3 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 467).</ref> and [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx20_ve1_1474> ii. 3, 5, 1-3. ''Cf.'' also iii. 4, 7. 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xviii. 14;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 40;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 4, 1, 9;<br> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 12. The dwelling of the moon in a [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] is mentioned, Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 5, 4, 17;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 21;<br> a [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] in [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 135;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 11, 6;<br> v. 12, 1, etc.</ref> it is expressly stated that Soma was wedded to the mansions, but dwelt only with [[रोहिणी|Rohiṇī]]; the others being angry, he had ultimately to undertake to live with them all equally. Weber<ref name=fx21_ve1_1474> ''Op. cit.,'' 277. ''Cf.'' the later system of the Siddhāntas, Whitney, ''Oriental and Linguistic Studies,'' 2, 372, and see Tilak, ''Orion,'' 33 ''et seq.''</ref> hence deduced that the Nakṣatras were regarded as of equal extent, but this is to press the texts unduly, except in the sense of approximate equality. The number of the mansions is not stated as 27 in the story told in the two Saṃhitās: the Taittīriya has 33, and the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] no  number; but 27 appears as their number in the list which is found in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx22_ve1_1474> iv. 4, 10, 1-3.</ref> and elsewhere.<ref name=fx23_ve1_1474> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxix. 13, but Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 13, 20, has 28;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 1, 1-5, in lists of Nakṣatras. See also Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ix, 7;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 5, 4, 5;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxiii, 23;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, ii. 16;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 2, 2;<br> [[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]], 18. 20 (verse 34 has 28, but it is interpolated);<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiv. 78, etc.</ref> The number 28 is much less well attested: in one passage of the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx24_ve1_1474> i. 5, 2, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, 1, 360, n.</ref> [[अभिजित्|Abhijit]] is practically marked as a new comer, though in a later book,<ref name=fx25_ve1_1474> iii. 1, 2, 6.</ref> in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx26_ve1_1474> ii. 13, 20.</ref> and in the Atharvaveda list,<ref name=fx27_ve1_1474> xix. 7, 1;<br> 8, 1 = Nakṣatrakalpa, 10. 26. So in [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 26.</ref> it has found acceptance. It is perfectly possible that 28 is the earlier number, and that [[अभिजित्|Abhijit]] dropped out because it was faint, or too far north, or because 27 was a more mystic (3×3×3) number: it is significant that the Chinese Sieou and the Arabic Manāzil are 28 in number.<ref name=fx28_ve1_1474> Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 409-411;<br> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 8, 390.</ref> Weber,<ref name=fx29_ve1_1474> ''Op. cit.,'' 2, 280;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 446;<br> 10, 223, 224, 226, 227.</ref> however, believes that 27 is the older number in India.<br><br>The meaning of the number is easily explained when it is remembered that a periodic month occupies something between 27 and 28 days, more nearly the former number. Such a month is in fact recognized in the Lāṭyāyana<ref name=fx30_ve1_1474> iv. 8, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> and [[निदान|Nidāna]] Sūtras<ref name=fx31_ve1_1474> v. 11. 12. See Weber, 2, 281288.</ref> as consisting of 27 days, 12 months making a year of 324 days, a [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] year, or with an intercalary month, a year of 351 days. The [[निदान|Nidāna]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx32_ve1_1474> Thibaut, ''Astronomic, Astrologie und Mathematik,'' 7.</ref> makes an attempt to introduce the [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] reckoning into the civil or solar (''sāvana'') year of 360 days, for it holds that the sun spends 13(1/3) days in each [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] (13(1/3)×27 = 360). But the month of 27 or 28 days plays no part in the chronological calculations of the Veda.<ref name=fx33_ve1_1474> See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''</ref><br><br>''The Names of the Nakṣatras.''--In addition to the two mentioned in the Rigveda, the earlier Atharvaveda<ref name=fx34_ve1_1474> ''l. e.,'' books i. xvi.</ref> gives the  names of [[ज्येष्ठघ्नी|Jyeṣṭhaghnī]]<ref name=fx35_ve1_1474> vi. 110, 2. This constellation, ‘the slayer of the oldest,’ was apparently of evil omen. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 2, 8. Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 361, equates it with Antares or Cor Scorpionis, with or without , Scorpionis (Jyaīṣṭhaghnī is a misreading in the edition of Whitney and Roth).</ref> (the later [[ज्येष्ठा|Jyeṣṭhā]]) and [[विचृतौ|Vicṛtau]],<ref name=fx36_ve1_1474> vi. 110, 2. It is also mentioned in ii. 8, 1;<br> iii. 7, 4;<br> vi. 121, 3. It is identified by the commentators with [[मूल|Mūla]], ‘the root,’ the two stars,  and Scorpionis, which form the sting of the Scorpion's tail;<br> Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 48.</ref> which are mentioned as in close connexion, and of Revatīs (plural) and [[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]].<ref name=fx37_ve1_1474> ix. 7, 3.</ref> With reference to possible times for the ceremony of the Agnyādhāna, or ‘laying of the sacred fires,’ the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx38_ve1_1474> viii. 1.</ref> the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx39_ve1_1474> i. 6, 9.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx40_ve1_1474> i. 1, 2, 1-6.</ref> mention the Nakṣatras called [[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]], [[रोहिणी|Rohiṇī]], Phalgunyas, [[हस्त|Hasta]]; the latter [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] adds [[पुनर्वसू|Punarvasū]], and in an additional remark<ref name=fx41_ve1_1474> i. 1, 2, 8.</ref> excludes Pūrve [[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]] in favour of Uttare [[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]]. The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx42_ve1_1474> ii. 1, 2, 1.</ref> adds [[मृगशीर्ष|Mṛgaśīrṣa]] and [[चित्रा|Citrā]] as possibilities. On the other hand, [[पुनर्वसू|Punarvasū]] is recommended by all authorities<ref name=fx43_ve1_1474> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 5, 1, 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 7, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, viii. 15;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 2, 10;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3.</ref> as suitable for the Punarādheya, ‘relaying of the sacred fires,’ which takes place if the first fire has failed to effect the aim of its existence, the prosperity of the sacrificer.<ref name=fx44_ve1_1474> Hillebrandt, ''Rituallitteratur,'' 109.</ref> The [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx45_ve1_1474> viii. 15;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā. i. 7, 2.</ref> however, allows Anurādhās also.<br><br>In the ceremony of the Agnicayana, or ‘piling of the firealtar,’ the bricks are assumed to be equal in number to the Nakṣatras. The bricks number 756, and they are equated to 27 Nakṣatras multiplied by 27 secondary Nakṣatras, reckoned as 720 (instead of 729), with the addition of 36 days, the length of an intercalary month. Nothing can be usefully derived from this piece of priestly nonsense.<ref name=fx46_ve1_1474> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 5, 4, 5. See Weber, 2, 298, with whom Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 42, 383, n. 1, concurs. For a wild speculation, see Shamasastry, ''Gavam ayana,'' 122 ''et seq.''</ref> But in connexion with this ceremony the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx47_ve1_1474> Taittiriya Samhitā, iv. 4, 10. 1-3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 13, 20;<br> Kātnaka Saṃhitā, xxxix. 13.</ref> enumerate the 27  Nakṣatras, and these lists<ref name=fx48_ve1_1474> The forms and genders are given as accepted by Weber, 2, 300. The latter depend on references to the names of the Nakṣatras in other passages in some cases--''e.g., Anūrādheṣu,'' in [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]], viii. 15, shows that the name is a masculine in that Saṃhitā.</ref> may be given ''in extenso'' as follows:<C1>''[[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.'' <C2>''Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhita.'' <C3>''[[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.''<C1>1. [[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]] (fem. plur.) ... <C2>[[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]] ... ... ... <C3>[[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]]<C1>2. [[रोहिणी|Rohiṇī]] ... ... ... <C2>[[रोहिणी|Rohiṇī]] ... ... ... <C3>[[रोहिणी|Rohiṇī]]<C1>3. [[मृगशीर्ष|Mṛgaśīrṣa]] (neut.) ... <C2>Invagā ... ... ... <C3>Invakā<C1>4. [[आर्द्रा|Ārdrā]] ... ... ... <C2>[[बाहु|Bāhu]] ... ... ... <C3>[[बाहु|Bāhu]]<C1>5. [[पुनर्वसू|Punarvasū]] (dual) ... <C2>[[पुनर्वसु|Punarvasu]] (sing.) ... ... <C3>[[पुनर्वसु|Punarvasu]]<C1>6. [[तिष्य|Tiṣya]] ... ... ... <C2>[[तिष्य|Tiṣya]] ... ... ... <C3>[[तिष्य|Tiṣya]]<C1>7. [[आश्रेषास्|Āśreṣās]] (fem. plur.) ... <C2>Āśleṣās(plur.; Pada Aśleṣā) <C3>Āśleṣās (or Aśleṣās)<C1>8. [[मघास्|Maghās]] (fem. plur.) ... <C2>[[मघास्|Maghās]] ... ... ... <C3>[[मघास्|Maghās]]<C1>9. [[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]] (fem. dual) ... <C2>Phalgunīs (plur.) ... ... <C3>Phalgunis<C1>10. [[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]] (fem. dual) ...<C2>Phalgunīs (plur.) ... ... <C3>Uttarāḥa Phalgunīs<C1>11. [[हस्त|Hasta]] ... ... ... <C2>[[हस्त|Hasta]] ... ... ... <C3>Hastau (dual)<C1>12. [[चित्रा|Citrā]] ... ... ... <C2>[[चित्रा|Citrā]] ... ... ... <C3>[[चित्रा|Citrā]]<C1>13. [[स्वाती|Svātī]] ... ... ... <C2>[[निष्ट्य|Niṣṭya]] (neut.) ... ... <C3>Niṣṭyā<C1>14. [[विशाखे|Viśākhe]] (fem. dual) ... <C2>Viśākha (neut. sing.) ... <C3>Viśākhā (fem. sing.)<C1>15. [[अनूराधास्|Anūrādhās]] (plur.) ... <C2>Anūrādhā (Pada Anu-[[अनूराधास्|Anūrādhās]] (masc. rādhā) <C3>[[अनूराधास्|Anūrādhās]] (masc. plur.)<C1>16. [[रोहिणी|Rohiṇī]] ... ... ... <C2>[[ज्येष्ठा|Jyeṣṭhā]] ... ... ... <C3>[[ज्येष्ठा|Jyeṣṭhā]]<C1>17. [[विचृतौ|Vicṛtau]] ... ... ... <C2>[[मूल|Mūla]] (neut.) ... ... <C3>[[मूल|Mūla]]<C1>18. Aṣāḍhās (fem. plur.) ... <C2>Aṣāḍhās ... ... ... <C3>Aṣāḍhās<C1>19. Aṣāḍhās (fem. plur.) ... <C2>Aṣāḍhās ... ... ...<C3>Uttarā Aṣāḍhās<C1>20. <C2>[[अभिजित्|Abhijit]] ... ... ...<C1>21. [[श्रोणा|Śroṇā]] ... ... ... <C2>[[श्रोणा|Śroṇā]] ... ... ... <C3>[[अश्वत्थ|Aśvattha]]<C1>22. [[श्रविष्ठास्|Śraviṣṭhās]] (plur.) ... <C2>[[श्रविष्ठास्|Śraviṣṭhās]] ... ... ... <C3>[[श्रविष्ठास्|Śraviṣṭhās]]<C1>23. [[शतभिषज्|Śatabhiṣaj]] ... ... <C2>[[शतभिषज्|Śatabhiṣaj]] ... ... ... <C3>[[शतभिषज्|Śatabhiṣaj]]<C1>24. Proṣṭhapadās (masc. plur.) <C2>Proṣṭhapadās ... ... <C3>Proṣṭhapadās<C1>25. Proṣṭhapadās(masc. plur.) <C2>Proṣṭhapadās ... ... <C3>Uttare Proṣṭhapadās<C1>26. [[रेवती|Revatī]] ... ... ... <C2>[[रेवती|Revatī]] ... ... ... <C3>[[रेवती|Revatī]]<C1>27. [[अश्वयुजौ|Aśvayujau]] (dual) ... <C2>[[अश्वयुजौ|Aśvayujau]] ... ... ... <C3>[[अश्वयुजौ|Aśvayujau]]<C1>28. [[अपभरणीस्|Apabharaṇīs]] (fem. plur.) <C2>Bharaṇīs ... ... ... <C3>[[अपभरणीस्|Apabharaṇīs]]<br><br>The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Brahmaṇa<ref name=fx49_ve1_1474> i. 5, 1</ref> has a list of the Nakṣatras which agrees generally with the list of the Saṃhitās. It runs as follows: [[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]], [[रोहिणी|Rohiṇī]], Invakās, Bāhū (dual), [[तिष्य|Tiṣya]], Āśleṣās, [[मघास्|Maghās]], Pūrve [[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]], Uttare [[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]], [[हस्त|Hasta]], [[चित्रा|Citrā]], Niṣṭyā, [[विशाखे|Viśākhe]], [[अनूराधास्|Anūrādhās]], [[रोहिणी|Rohiṇī]], Mūlabarhaṇī, Pūrvā Aṣāḍhās, Uttarā Aṣāḍhās, [[श्रोणा|Śroṇā]], [[श्रविष्ठास्|Śraviṣṭhās]], [[शतभिषज्|Śatabhiṣaj]], Pūrve Proṣṭhapadās, Uttare Proṣṭhapadās, [[रेवती|Revatī]], [[अश्वयुजौ|Aśvayujau]], [[अपभरणीस्|Apabharaṇīs]]. In a later book,<ref name=fx50_ve1_1474> iii. 1, 4, 1 ''et seq. Cf.'' iii. 1, 1-2.</ref> however, the list grows to 28,  and the full moon is inserted after number 14, and the new moon after number 28, as an attempt to bring the Nākṣatra (lunar) month into accordance with the Sāvana (solar) month of 30 days. The names in this second list are as in the Saṃhitās with the following exceptions. The seven stars of the [[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]] are named as Ambā, [[दुला|Dulā]], [[नितत्नी|Nitatnī]], Abhrayantī, Meghayantī, Varṣayantī, Cupuṇīkā, names found also in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]]<ref name=fx51_ve1_1474> iv. 4, 5, 1.</ref> and [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx52_ve1_1474> xl. 4.</ref> Beside [[मृगशीर्ष|Mṛgaśīrṣa]], Invakās are also mentioned.<ref name=fx53_ve1_1474> iii. 1, 4, 3.</ref> Then come [[आर्द्रा|Ārdrā]], [[पुनर्वसू|Punarvasū]], [[तिष्य|Tiṣya]], [[आश्रेषास्|Āśreṣās]], [[मघास्|Maghās]] (beside which Anaghās, Agadās, and Arundhatīs are also mentioned), Phalgunyas (but elsewhere in the dual, Phalgunyau),<ref name=fx54_ve1_1474> iii. 1, 4, 9.</ref> Phalgunyas, [[हस्त|Hasta]], [[चित्रा|Citrā]], Niṣṭyā, [[विशाखे|Viśākhe]], [[अनूराधास्|Anūrādhās]], [[ज्येष्ठा|Jyeṣṭhā]], [[मूल|Mūla]], Aṣāḍhās, Aṣāḍhās, [[अभिजित्|Abhijit]], Śronā, [[श्रविष्ठास्|Śraviṣṭhās]], [[शतभिषज्|Śatabhiṣaj]], Proṣṭhapadās, Proṣṭhapadās, [[रेवती|Revatī]], [[अश्वयुजौ|Aśvayujau]], Bharaṇyas, but also [[अपभरणीस्|Apabharaṇīs]].<ref name=fx55_ve1_1474> iii. 1, 5, 14.</ref> [[अभिजित्|Abhijit]], which occurs also in an earlier part of the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx56_ve1_1474> i. 5, 2, 3.</ref> is perhaps interpolated. But Weber's<ref name=fx57_ve1_1474> ''Op. cit.,'' 305, 306.</ref> argument that [[अभिजित्|Abhijit]] is out of place in this list because [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] is here mentioned as the 28th [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]], loses some force from the fact (of course unknown to him) that the list in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx58_ve1_1474> ii. 13, 20.</ref> contains 28 Nakṣatras, including [[अभिजित्|Abhijit]], and adds [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] at the end as another.<br><br>In another passage<ref name=fx59_ve1_1474> i. 5, 2, 7. ''Cf.'' Tilak, ''Orion,'' 41 ''et seq.''</ref> the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] divides the Nakṣatras into two sets, the Deva Nakṣatras and the Yama Nakṣatras, being 1-14 and 15-27 (with the omission of [[अभिजित्|Abhijit]]) respectively. This division corresponds with one in the third book of the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx60_ve1_1474> iii. 1, 2. ''Cf.'' [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 12, with Vināyaka's note.</ref> where the days of the light half of the month and those of the dark half are equated with the Nakṣatras. The [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] treats the former series as south, the latter as north; but this has no relation to facts, and can only be regarded as a ritual absurdity.<br><br>The late nineteenth book of the Atharvaveda contains a list<ref name=fx61_ve1_1474> xix. 7, 1 ''et seq.'' The number is given as 28 in xix. 7, 1 (as emended) and 8, 2. ''Cf.'' Lanman's introductory note to the former hymn in Whitney's Translation, 906, 907.</ref> of the Nakṣatras, including [[अभिजित्|Abhijit]]. The names here  given are: [[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]], [[रोहिणी|Rohiṇī]], [[मृगशिरस्|Mṛgaśiras]], [[आर्द्रा|Ārdrā]], [[पुनर्वसू|Punarvasū]], [[पुष्य|Puṣya]], Āśleṣās, [[मघास्|Maghās]], Pūrvā Phalgunyau (''sic''),<ref name=fx62_ve1_1474> The reading Pūrvā Phalgunyau must be wrong;<br> perhaps Dvaye (''cf.'' verse 5) or Pūrve should be read. See Lanman in Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 908. The Uttare Phalgunyau are omitted.</ref> [[हस्त|Hasta]], [[चित्रा|Citrā]], Svāti (masc.),<ref name=fx63_ve1_1474> [[स्वाती|Svātī]] should, no doubt, be read;<br> but for the Svāti (''sie'') of all the manuscripts (Saṃhitā and Pada), ''cf.'' the ''navasrakti'' of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 3, 6, with Keith's note.</ref> [[विशाखे|Viśākhe]], [[अनुराधा|Anurādhā]],<ref name=fx64_ve1_1474> See Lanman in Whitney, 908.</ref> [[ज्येष्ठा|Jyeṣṭhā]], [[मूल|Mūla]], Pūrvā Aṣāḍhās,<ref name=fx65_ve1_1474> Lanman, ''ibid.,'' 909. reads Pūrvā [[अषाढा|Aṣāḍhā]] and Uttarā [[अषाढा|Aṣāḍhā]];<br> Whitney reads Pūrvā and Uttarā Aṣāḍhās. The manuscripts have Pūrvā and Uttare, which cannot stand.</ref> Uttarā Aṣāḍhās, [[अभिजित्|Abhijit]], [[श्रवण|Śravaṇa]], [[श्रविष्ठास्|Śraviṣṭhās]], [[शतभिषज्|Śatabhiṣaj]], Dvayā Proṣṭhapadā, [[रेवती|Revatī]], [[अश्वयुजौ|Aśvayujau]], Bharaṇyas.<br><br>''The Position of the Nakṣatras.''--There is nothing definite in Vedic literature regarding the position of most of the Nakṣatras, but the later astronomy precisely locates all of them, and its statements agree on the whole satisfactorily with what is said in the earlier texts, though Weber<ref name=fx66_ve1_1474> ''Op. cit.,'' 2, 367 ''et seq.''</ref> was inclined to doubt this. The determinations adopted below are due to Whitney<ref name=fx67_ve1_1474> ''Oriental and Linguis'tic Essays,'' 2, 350 ''et seq.''</ref> in his notes on the [[सूर्य|Sūrya]] Siddhānta.

कृत्तिकास्
<u>'''1. Kṛttikās'''</u> are unquestionably  Tauri, etc., the Pleiades. The names of the seven stars forming this constellation, and given above from [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] texts,<ref name=fx68_ve1_1475> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 4, 5, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xl. 4;<br> Taittīrīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 4, 1.</ref> include three--''abhrayantī,'' ‘forming clouds’; ''meghayantī,'' ‘making cloudy’; ''varṣayantī,'' ‘causing rain’--which clearly refer to the rainy Pleiades. The word ''kṛttikā'' possibly means ‘web,’ from the root ''kṛt,'' ‘spin.’

रोहिणी
<u>'''2. Rohiṇī,'''</u> ‘ruddy,’ is the name of the conspicuously reddish star, ''a'' Tauri or Aldebaran, and denotes the group of the Hyades,  Tauri. Its identification seems absolutely assured by the legend of Prajāpati in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx69_ve1_1476> iii. 33. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 2, 8;<br> Tilak, ''Orion,'' 98 ''et seq.''</ref> He is there represented as pursuing his daughter with incestuous intention, and as having been shot with an arrow ('''[[इषु त्रिकाण्डा|Iṣu Trikāṇḍā]],''' ‘the belt of Orion’) by the ‘huntsman’ ('''[[मृगव्याध|Mṛgavyādha]],''' ‘Sirius’). Prajāpati is clearly Orion ([[मृगशिरस्|Mṛgaśiras]] being the name of the little group of stars in Orion's head).

मृगशीर्ष
<u>'''3. Mṛgaśīrṣa'''</u> or '''[[मृगशिरस्|Mṛgaśiras]],''' also called Invakā or Invagā,  seems to be the faint stars , Orionis. They are called Andhakā, ‘blind,’ in the Śāntikalpa of the Atharvaveda, probably because of their dimness.<ref name=fx70_ve1_1477> Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 401. ''Cf.'' Tilak, 102 ''et seq.''</ref>

आर्द्रा
<u>'''4. Ārdrā,'''</u> ‘moist,’ is the name of the brilliant star,  Orionis. But the names by which it is styled, in the plural as Ārdrās in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx71_ve1_1478> i. 26.</ref> and the Nakṣatrakalpa,<ref name=fx72_ve1_1478> 10.</ref> and in the dual as Bāhū, in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx73_ve1_1478> i. 5, 1.</ref> point to a constellation of two or more stars, and it may be noted<ref name=fx74_ve1_1478> Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 352, 401, n. 1.</ref> that the corresponding Chinese Sieou includes the seven brilliant stars composing the shoulders, the belt, and the knees of Orion.

पुनर्वसू
<u>'''5. Punarvasū,'''</u> ‘the two that give wealth again,’ denotes the two stars,  and  Geminorum, on the heads of Castor and Pollux. The name is no doubt connected with the beneficent character of the Aśvins, who correspond to the Dioscuri.<ref name=fx75_ve1_1479> Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 212;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 53.</ref>

तिष्य
<u>'''6. Tiṣya'''</u> or '''[[पुष्य|Puṣya]]''' includes the somewhat faint group in the body of the Crab, , and  Cancri. The singular is rather curious, as primarily one star would seem to have been meant. and none of the group is at all prominent.<ref name=fx76_ve1_1480> Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 403, n. 1.</ref>

आश्रेषास्
<u>'''7. Āśreṣās'''</u> or '''Āśleṣās,''' which in some texts<ref name=fx77_ve1_1481> Aśreṣās, [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 26;<br> Śāntikalpa;<br> Nakṣatrakalpa;<br> Aśleṣās, Śāntikalpa, 2;<br> Nakṣatrakalpa, 4. 48.</ref> is certainly to be read Aśreṣās or Aśleṣas, denotes , and perhaps also , Hydræ. The word means ‘embracer,’ a name which admirably fits the constellation.

मघास्
<u>'''8. Maghās,'''</u> the ‘bounties,’ are the Sickle, or , Leonis. The variants '''Anaghā,''' the ‘sinless one,’ etc., clearly refer to the auspicious influence of the constellation.(**  9, 10. '''[[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]], Phalgunyau, Phalgū,'''<ref name=fx78_ve1_1482> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1.</ref> '''Phalgunīs, Phalgunyas,''' is really a-double constellation, divided into Pūrve, ‘former,’ and Uttare, ‘latter.’ The former is  and  Leonis, the latter  and 93 Leonis. According to Weber, the word denotes, like '''[[अर्जुनी|Arjunī]],''' the variant of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx79_ve1_1482> x. 85, 13.</ref> a ‘brightcoloured’ constellation. 

हस्त
<u>'''11. Hasta,'''</u> ‘hand,’ is made up of the five conspicuous stars () in Corvus, a number which the word itself suggests. According to Geldner,<ref name=fx80_ve1_1483> ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 177;<br> Rv. i. 105, 10. ''Cf.'' below, p. 427, n. 156.</ref> the ‘five bulls’ of the Rigveda are this constellation.

चित्रा
<u>'''12. Citrā,'''</u> ‘bright,’ is the beautiful star,  Virginis. It is mentioned in a legend of Indra in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx81_ve1_1484> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 2, 4-6.</ref> and in that of the ‘two divine dogs’ (''divyau śvānau'') in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx82_ve1_1484> ii. 1, 2, 13-17.</ref>

स्वाती
<u>'''13. Svātī'''</u> or '''Niṣṭyā''' is later clearly the brilliant star Arcturus or  Bootis, its place in the north being assured by the notice in the Śāntikalpa,<ref name=fx83_ve1_1485> 3.</ref> where it is said to be ‘ever traversing the northern way’ (''nityam uttara-mārgagam''). The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx84_ve1_1485> i. 5, 2. ''Cf.'' Tilak, ''Orion,'' 204.</ref> however, constructs an asterismal Prajāpati, giving him [[चित्रा|Citrā]] (''a'' Virginis) for head, [[हस्त|Hasta]] (Corvus) for hand, the [[विशाखे|Viśākhe]] (''a'' and  Libræ) for thighs, and the Anurādhās (, and  Scorpionis) for standing place, with Niṣṭyā for heart. But Arcturus, being 30º out, spoils this figure, while, on the other hand, the Arabic and Chinese systems have respectively, instead of Arcturus, , and  Virginis and  Virginis, which would well fit into the Prajāpati figure. But in spite of the force of this argument of Weber's,<ref name=fx85_ve1_1485> ''Op. cit.,'' 2, 307, 308.</ref> Whitney<ref name=fx86_ve1_1485> ''Op. cit.,'' 409.</ref> is not certain that Niṣṭyā here must mean a star in Virgo, pointing out that the name Niṣṭyā, ‘outcast,’ suggests the separation of this [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] from the others in question.

विशाखे
<u>'''14. Viśākhe'''</u> is the couple of stars  and  Libræ. This mansion is later called Rādhā according to the Amarakośa, and it is curious that in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx87_ve1_1486> xix. 7.</ref> the expression ''rādho [[विशाखे|Viśākhe]],'' ‘the [[विशाखे|Viśākhe]] are prosperity,’ should occur. But probably Rādhā is merely an invention due to the name of the next [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]], [[अनुराधा|Anurādhā]], wrongly conceived as meaning ‘that which is after or follows Rādhā.’<ref name=fx88_ve1_1486> Lanman in Whitney's Translation of the Atharvaveda, 908. ''Cf.'' Thibaut, ''Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,'' 63, 156.</ref>

अनूराधास्
<u>'''15. Anūrādhās'''</u> or '''[[अनुराधा|Anurādhā]],''' ‘propitious,’ is , and  (perhaps also ) Scorpionis. <br>==Foot Notes==

रोहिणी
<u>'''16. Rohiṇī,'''</u> ‘ruddy’; '''[[ज्येष्ठघ्नी|Jyeṣṭhaghnī]],''' ‘slaying the eldest’; or '''[[ज्येष्ठा|Jyeṣṭhā]],''' ‘eldest,’ is the name of the constellation , and  Scorpionis, of which the central star, , is the brilliant reddish Antares (or Cor Scorpionis).<br>==Foot Notes==

विचृतौ
<u>'''17. Vicṛtau,'''</u> ‘the two releasers’; '''[[मूल|Mūla]],''' ‘root’; or '''Mūlabarhaṇī,''' ‘uprooting,’ denote primarily  and  at the extremity of the tail of the Scorpion, but including also the nine or eleven stars from  to .(**  18, 19. '''Aṣāḍhās''' (‘unconquered’), distinguished as '''Pūrvās,''' ‘former,’ and '''Uttarās,''' ‘latter,’ are really two constellations, of which the former is composed of , and  Sagittarii, or of and  only, and the latter of , and  Sagittarii, or of two, and , only. It is probable that originally only four stars forming a square were meant as included in the whole constellation<ref name=fx89_ve1_1489> ''Cf.'' Thibaut, ''Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,'' 63, 156.</ref> --viz.,  and , with  and .

अभिजित्
<u>'''20. Abhijit'''</u> is the brilliant star  Lyræ with its two companions  and . Its location in 60º north latitude is completely discordant with the position of the corresponding Arabian and Chinese asterisms. This fact is considered by Oldenberg<ref name=fx90_ve1_1490> ''Nachrichten der ko7nigl. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Go7ttingen,'' 1909, 551, 552.</ref> to support the view that it was a later addition to the system; its occurrence, however, as early as the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx91_ve1_1490> ii. 13, 20.</ref> which he does not note, somewhat invalidates<ref name=fx92_ve1_1490> It is at the same time to be noted that [[अभिजित्|Abhijit]] is wanting both in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā and in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā lists.</ref> that view. In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx93_ve1_1490> i. 5, 2, 3.</ref> [[अभिजित्|Abhijit]] is said to be ‘over Aṣāḍhās, under [[श्रोणा|Śroṇā]],’ which Weber<ref name=fx94_ve1_1490> ''Op. cit.,'' 1, 320, 321;<br> 2, 307;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 224 ''et seq.''</ref> held to refer to its position in space, inferring thence that its Vedic position corresponded to that of the Arab Manāzil and the Chinese Sieou--viz., , Capricorni. But Whitney<ref name=fx95_ve1_1490> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 8, 393.</ref> argues effectively that the words ‘over’ and ‘under’ really refer to the place of [[अभिजित्|Abhijit]] in the list, ‘after’ Aṣāḍhās and ‘before’ [[श्रोणा|Śroṇā]].

श्रोणा
<u>'''21. Śroṇā,'''</u> ‘lame,’ or '''[[श्रवण|Śravaṇa]],''' ‘ear,’ denotes the bright star Aquilæ with  below and  above it. Weber<ref name=fx96_ve1_1491> ''Op. cit.,'' 2, 382;<br> but see Whitney, 404.</ref> very need-  lessly thinks that the name [[श्रवण|Śravaṇa]] suggested two ears and the head between. It is quite out of correspondence with the Manāzil and the Sieou, and is clearly an Indian invention.<ref name=fx97_ve1_1491> Oldenberg, ''loc. cit.''</ref>

श्रविष्ठास्
<u>'''22. Śraviṣṭhās,'''</u> ‘most famous,’ or later '''Dhaniṣṭhās,'''<ref name=fx98_ve1_1492> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 26;<br> Śāntikalpa, 13;<br> [[धनिष्ठा|Dhaniṣṭhā]], ''ibid.,'' 5.</ref> ‘most wealthy,’ is the diamond-shaped group, , and , in the Dolphin, perhaps also  in the same constellation. Like the preceding [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]], it is out of harmony with the Manāzil and Sieou.

शतभिषज्
<u>'''23. Śatabhiṣaj'''</u> or '''Śatabhiṣa,'''<ref name=fx99_ve1_1493> So probably in Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 13, 20, where see von Schroeder's critical note. The Śāntikalpa, 5, and Nakṣatrakalpa, 2, have Śatabhiṣā, and the latter, 1, has Śatabhiṣa (masculine).</ref> ‘having a hundred physicians,’ seems to be  Aquarii with the others around it vaguely conceived as numbering a hundred.(**  24, 25. '''[[प्रोष्ठ|Proṣṭha]]-padās''' (fem. plur.), ‘feet of a stool,’ or later '''Bhadra-padās,'''<ref name=fx100_ve1_1493> Śāntikalpa, 5, etc.</ref> ‘auspicious feet,’ a double asterism forming a square, the former (''pūrva'') consisting of  and  Pegasi, the latter (''uttara'') of  Pegasi and  Andromedæ.

रेवती
<u>'''26. Revatī,'''</u> ‘wealthy,’ denotes a large number of stars (later 32), of which  Piscium, close upon the ecliptic where it was crossed by the equator of about 570 A.D., is given as the southernmost.<br>==Foot Notes==

अश्व-युजौ
<u>'''27. Aśva-yujau,'''</u> ‘the two horse-harnessers,’ denotes the stars and  Arietis. Aśvinyau<ref name=fx101_ve1_1495> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 26: Nakṣatrakalpa, 9. 30.</ref> and [[अश्विनी|Aśvinī]]<ref name=fx102_ve1_1495> Nakṣatrakalpa, 4. 45;<br> Śāntikalpa, 5. 11.</ref> are later names.

भरणीस्
<u>'''28. Apabharaṇīs, Bharaṇīs,'''</u> or '''Bharaṇyas,''' ‘the bearers,’ is the name of the small triangle in the northern part of the Ram known as Musca or 35, 39, and 41 Arietis.<br><br>''The Nakṣatras and the Months.''--In the Brāhmaṇas the [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] names are regularly used to denote dates. This is done in two ways. The name, if not already a feminine, may be turned into a feminine and compounded with ''[[पूर्ण-मास|pūrṇa-māsa]],'' ‘the full moon,’ as in ''Tiṣyā-[[पूर्णमास|pūrṇamāsa]],'' ‘the full moon in the [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] [[तिष्य|Tiṣya]].’<ref name=fx103_ve1_1496> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 10, 1. ''Cf.'' vii. 4, 8, 1. 2;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], v. 9, 1.</ref> Much more often, however, it is turned into a derivative adjective, used with ''[[पौर्णमासी|paurṇamāsī]],'' ‘the full  moon (night),’ or with ''amāvāsyā,'' ‘the new moon (night),’ as in ''Phālgunī [[पौर्णमासी|paurṇamāsī]],'' ‘the full-moon night in the [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] Phalgunī’;<ref name=fx104_ve1_1496> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 3. 11 ''et seq.;<br>'' vi. 2, 2, 18;<br> xiii. 4, 1, 4;<br> Kausītaki [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3;<br> iv. 4;<br> v. 1. See also Caland, ''Über das rituelle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 36, 37, and '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''</ref> or, as is usual in the Sūtras, the [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] adjective alone is used to denote the full-moon night. The month itself is called by a name derived<ref name=fx105_ve1_1496> Primarily an adjective, with ''[[मास|māsa]]'' to be supplied--''e.g.,'' Phālguna, ‘(the month) connected with the [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] [[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]].’</ref> from that of a [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]], but only Phālguna,<ref name=fx106_ve1_1496> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], v. 9, 8.</ref> [[चैत्र|Caitra]],<ref name=fx107_ve1_1496> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xix. 3.</ref> Vaiśākha,<ref name=fx108_ve1_1496> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 1, 1, 7.</ref> Taiṣya,<ref name=fx109_ve1_1496> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xix. 2. 3.</ref> Māgha<ref name=fx110_ve1_1496> ''Ibid.;<br>'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 8, 1, 4. For the later list, see Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 327, 328.</ref> occur in the Brāhmaṇas, the complete list later being Phālguna, [[चैत्र|Caitra]], Vaiśākha, Jyaiṣṭha, Āṣāḍha, Śrāvaṇa, Prauṣṭhapada, Āśvayuja, Kārttika, Mārgaśīrṣa, Taiṣya, Māgha. Strictly speaking, these should be lunar months, but the use of a lunar year was clearly very restricted: we have seen that as early as the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] there was a tendency to equate lunar months with the twelve months of thirty days which made up the solar year (see '''[[मास|Māsa]]''').<br><br>''The Nakṣatras and Chronology.''--(1) An endeavour has been made to ascertain from the names of the months the period at which the systematic employment of those names was introduced. Sir William Jones<ref name=fx111_ve1_1496> ''Asiatic Researches,'' 2, 296.</ref> refers to this possibility, and Bentley, by the gratuitous assumption that Śrāvaṇa always marked the summer solstice, concluded that the names of the months did not date before B.C. 1181. Weber<ref name=fx112_ve1_1496> ''Op. cit.,'' 2, 347, 348;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 455;<br> 10, 230, 231.</ref> considered that there was a possibility of fixing a date by this means, but Whitney<ref name=fx113_ve1_1496> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 6, 413;<br> 8, 85 ''et seq.''</ref> has convincingly shown that it is an impossible feat, and Thibaut<ref name=fx114_ve1_1496> ''Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik,'' 16.</ref> concurs in this view. Twelve became fixed as the number of the months because of the desire, evident in the Brāhmaṇas, somehow or other to harmonize lunar with solar time; but the selection of twelve Nakṣatras out of twenty-seven as connected with the night of full moon can have no chronological significance, because full moon at  no period occurred in those twelve only, but has at all periods occurred in every one of the twenty-seven at regularly recurrent intervals.<br><br>(2) All the lists of the Nakṣatras begin with Kṛttīkās. It is only fair to suppose that there was some special reason for this fact. Now the later list of the Nakṣatras begins with [[अश्विनी|Aśvinī]], and it was unquestionably rearranged because at the time of its adoption the vernal equinox coincided with the star  Piscium on the border of [[रेवती|Revatī]] and [[अश्विनी|Aśvinī]],<ref name=fx115_ve1_1496> ''Cf.'' Colebrooke, ''Essays,'' 2, 264;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 234.</ref> say in the course of the sixth century A.D. Weber<ref name=fx116_ve1_1496> ''Naxatra,'' 2, 362-364;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 234;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 2, n. 2, etc.</ref> has therefore accepted the view that the [[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]] were chosen for a similar reason, and the date at which that [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] coincided with the vernal equinox has been estimated at some period in the third millennium B.C.<ref name=fx117_ve1_1496> See Weber. ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Bühler, ''Indian Antiquary,'' 23, 245, n. 20;<br> Tilak, ''Orion,'' 40 ''et seq.''</ref> A very grave objection to this view is its assumption that the sun, and not the moon, was then regarded as connected with the Nakṣatras; and both Thibaut<ref name=fx118_ve1_1496> ''Indian Antiquary,'' 24, 96.</ref> and Oldenberg<ref name=fx119_ve1_1496> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 631;<br> 49, 473;<br> 50, 451, 452;<br> ''Nachrichten der ko7nigl. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Go7ttingen,'' 1909, 564;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 1103.</ref> have pronounced decidedly against the idea of connecting the equinox with the [[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]]. Jacobi<ref name=fx120_ve1_1496> ''Festgruss an Roth,'' 68 ''et seq.'' = ''Indian Antiquary,'' 23, 154 ''et seq.;<br> Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 49, 218 ''et seq.;<br>'' 50, 83;<br> ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1910, 463.</ref> has contended that in the Rigveda<ref name=fx121_ve1_1496> vii. 103 (the ‘frog’ hymn);<br> x. 85 (the ‘marriage’ hymn).</ref> the commencement of the rains and the summer solstice mark the beginning of the new year and the end of the old, and that further the new year began with the summer solstice in [[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]].<ref name=fx121_ve1_1496/> He has also referred to the distinction of the two sets of Deva and Yama Nakṣatras in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx122_ve1_1496> i. 5, 2, 8.</ref> as supporting his view of the connexion of the sun and the Nakṣatras. But this view is far from satisfactory: the Rigveda passages cannot yield the sense required except by translating the word ''[[द्वादश|dvādaśa]]''<ref name=fx123_ve1_1496> Rv. vii. 103, 9.</ref> as ‘the twelfth (month)’ instead of ‘consisting of twelve parts,’ that is, ‘year,’ the accepted  interpretation; and the division of the Nakṣatras is not at all satisfactorily explained by a supposed connexion with the sun. It may further be mentioned that even if the [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] of [[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]] be deemed to have been chosen because of its coincidence with the vernal equinox, both Whitney<ref name=fx124_ve1_1496> ''Oriental and Linguistic Essays,'' 2, 383.</ref> and Thibaut<ref name=fx125_ve1_1496> ''Indian Antiquary,'' 24, 97. ''Cf.'' Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1910, 464, n. 4.</ref> are prepared to regard it as no more than a careless variant of the date given by the [[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]], which puts the winter solstice in Māgha.<br><br>(3) The winter solstice in Māgha is assured by a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] text, for the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx126_ve1_1496> xix. 3. This was first noticed by Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 345 ''et seq.,'' who pointed out its relation to the datum of the [[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]]. The same date as that of the [[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]] is found in a passage of the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] cited by Shamasastry, ''Gavām Ayana,'' 137 (''māghe māse dhaniṣṭhābhir uttareṇaiti bhānumān, ardhāśleṣasya śrāvaṇasya dakṣiṇenopanivartate,'' ‘in the month of Māgha the sun goes north with the asterism Dhaniṣṭhās, in the month of Śrāvaṇa he returns south in the middle of the asterism Āśleṣa’;<br> the sense is clear, though the text is corrupt). The passage is apparently not in Caland's manuscripts, or he would have mentioned it in his paper, ''Über das vituelle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 36, 37. Its date and value are therefore not quite certain.</ref> expressly places it in the new moon of Māgha (''māghasyāmāvāsyāyām''). It is not very important whether we take this with the commentators<ref name=fx127_ve1_1496> Vināyaka on [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Ānartīya on [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 19, 1;<br> Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 345. The assumption of the scholiasts seems to be due to the fact that to their minds a month must end with a new moon (''amānta'') or with full moon (''pūrṇimānta''). But there is no reason to say that in Vedic times the month may not have commenced with the new moon;<br> the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] passage would thus be quite satisfactorily explained.</ref> as the new moon in the middle of a month commencing with the day after full moon in Taiṣa, or, which is much more likely, as the new moon beginning the month and preceding full moon in Māgha. The datum gives a certain possibility of fixing an epoch in the following way. If the end of [[रेवती|Revatī]] marked the vernal equinox at one period, then the precession of the equinoxes would enable us to calculate at what point of time the vernal equinox was in a position corresponding to the winter solstice in Māgha, when the solstitial colure cut the ecliptic at the beginning of [[श्रविष्ठास्|Śraviṣṭhās]]. This would be, on the strict theory, in the third quarter of Bharaṇī, 6(3/4) asterisms removed from [[श्रविष्ठास्|Śraviṣṭhās]], and the difference between that and the beginning of [[अश्विनी|Aśvinī]]=  1(3/4) asterisms = 23(1/3)º (27 asterisms being = 360º). Taking the starting-point at 499 A.D., the assured period of [[वराह|Varāha]] Mihira, Jones<ref name=fx128_ve1_1496> ''Asiatic Researches,'' 2, 393.</ref> arrived at the date B. C. 1181 for the vernal equinox corresponding to the winter solstice in Māgha--that is, on the basis of 1º = 72 years as the precession. Pratt<ref name=fx129_ve1_1496> ''Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,'' 31, 49.</ref> arrived at precisely the same date, taking the same rate of precession and adopting as his basis the ascertained position in the Siddhāntas of the junction star<ref name=fx130_ve1_1496> ''Cf.'' Whitney, ''Oriental and Linguistic Essays,'' 2, 373.</ref> of [[मघा|Maghā]],  Leonis or Regulus. Davis<ref name=fx131_ve1_1496> ''Asiatic Researches,'' 2, 268;<br> 5, 288.</ref> and Colebrooke<ref name=fx132_ve1_1496> ''Essays,'' 1, 109, 110. See Sir T. Colebrooke, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1, 335 ''et seq.;<br>'' Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 381, 382.</ref> arrived at a different date, B.C. 1391, by taking as the basis of their calculation the junction star of [[चित्रा|Citrā]], which happens to be of uncertain position, varying as much as 3º in the different textbooks. But though the twelfth century has received a certain currency as the epoch of the observation in the [[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]],<ref name=fx133_ve1_1496> ''E.g.,'' Lassen, ''Indische Alterthumskunde,'' 1^2, 606, 607, 976, and ''cf.'' Thibaut, ''Astronomie, Astrologic und Mathematik,'' 17, 18;<br> Tilak, ''Orion,'' 38, 39.</ref> it is of very doubtful value. As Whitney points out, it is impossible to say that the earlier asterisms coincided in position with the later asterisms of 13(1/3)º extent each. They were not chosen as equal divisions, but as groups of stars which stood in conjunction with the moon; and the result of subsequently making them strictly equal divisions was to throw the principal stars of the later groups altogether out of their asterisms.<ref name=fx134_ve1_1496> Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 375.</ref> Nor can we say that the star  Piscium early formed the eastern boundary of [[रेवती|Revatī]]; it may possibly not even have been in that asterism at all, for it is far remote from the Chinese and Arabic asterisms corresponding to [[रेवती|Revatī]]. Added to all this, and to the uncertainty of the starting-point-582 A.D., 560 A.D., or 491 A.D. being variants<ref name=fx135_ve1_1496> ''Cf.'' Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 377, 379;<br> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 363, 364, where he prefers A.D. 582.</ref> --is the fact that the place of the equinox is not a matter accurately determinable by mere observation, and that the Hindu astronomers of the Vedic period cannot be deemed to have been very accurate observers, since they made no precise determination of the  number of days of the year, which even in the [[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]] they do not determine more precisely than as 366 days, and even the [[सूर्य|Sūrya]] Siddhānta<ref name=fx136_ve1_1496> See Whitney's note on [[सूर्य|Sūrya]] Siddhānta, iii. 12;<br> ''op. cit.,'' 2, 369, n. 1;<br> 374, n. 1. ''Cf.'' Tilak, ''Orion,'' 18.</ref> does not know the precession of the equinoxes. It is therefore only fair to allow a thousand years for possible errors,<ref name=fx137_ve1_1496> Whitney, 384, followed by Thibaut, ''Indian Antiquary,'' 24, 98;<br> ''Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik,'' 18. See also Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 236;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 2, n. 2;<br> Whitney, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1, 313 ''et seq.;<br>'' in Colebrooke's ''Essays,'' 1^2, 120 ''et seq.;<br>'' Max Müller, in his edition of the Rigveda, iv^2, xxx ''et seq.,'' was also inclined to regard the date as very uncertain;<br> only in his popular works (''Chips,'' 1, 113, etc.) did he accept 1181 B.C., or rather 1186 B.C, as recalculated by Main from Pratt's calculation. Shamasastry's defence, ''Gavām Ayana,'' 122 ''et seq.,'' of the [[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]] shows a misunderstanding the criticisms made. See Keith, ''ournal of the Royal A siatic Society,'' 1910, 66, n. 5.</ref> and the only probable conclusion to be drawn from the datum of the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] is that it was recording an observation which must have been made some centuries B.C., in itself a result quite in harmony with the probable date of the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] literature,<ref name=fx138_ve1_1496> ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 12, 202;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaha,'' 20 ''et seq.'' It has been put earlier: see Thibaut, ''Astronomie,'' etc., 18;<br> Būhler, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 55, 544, and ''cf.'' Būhler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 2, xl ''et seq.;<br> Indian Antiquary,'' 23, 247;<br> von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 45 ''et seq.'' See also Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 3;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Rituallitteratur,'' 31, who are inclined to accept an early date, fourth or fifth century B.C., for the Āpastamba Sūtras, from which a still earlier date for the Brāhmaṇas must be conceded. But Eggeling is more probably correct when he assigns the Āpastamba Sūtras to the third century, B.C. See ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xl, and it seems unwise unduly to press back the date of Vedic literature. It is noteworthy that in the Epic the solstice is still in Māgha (Mahābhārata, xiii. 168, 6. 28). Reference is, however, made (''ibid.,'' i. 71, 34) to the Nakṣatras commencing with [[श्रवण|Śravaṇa]], and the first month is Mārgaśīrṣa (see Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 24, 21 ''et seq.''). ''Cf.'' also Tilak, ''Orion,'' 37, 216.</ref> say B.C. 800-600.<br><br>(4) Another chronological argument has been derived from the fact that there is a considerable amount of evidence for Phālguna having been regarded as the beginning of the year, since the full moon in [[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]] is often described as the ‘mouth (''mukham'') of the year.’<ref name=fx139_ve1_1496> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 8, 1. 2;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], v. 9, 9. ''Cf.'' [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 4;<br> v. 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 2, 8;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 2, 2, 18;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], v. 3. 16. According to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] and the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] Brāhmaṇas, the beginning falls at the middle of the joint asterisṃ.</ref> Jacobi<ref name=fx140_ve1_1496> ''Indian Antiquary,'' 23, 156 ''et seq.;<br> Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 49, 223 ''et seq.;<br>'' 50, 72-81. See Tilak, ''Orion,'' 53 ''et seq.;<br>'' 198 ''et seq.''</ref> considers that this  was due to the fact that the year was reckoned from the winter solstice, which would coincide with the month of Phālguna about B.C. 4000. Oldenberg<ref name=fx141_ve1_1496> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 630 ''et seq.;<br>'' 49. 475, 476;<br> 50, 453-457. ''Cf.'' Whitney, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, lxxxvii.</ref> and Thibaut,<ref name=fx142_ve1_1496> ''Indian Antiquary,'' 24, 86 ''et seq.''</ref> on the other hand, maintain that the choice of Phālguna as the ‘mouth’ of the year was due to its being the first month of spring. This view is favoured by the fact that there is distinct evidence<ref name=fx143_ve1_1496> See Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 329 ''et seq.,'' and ''cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 36;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1;<br> a Śruti passage in the commentary on Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 2, 13;<br> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 2, 4, 23. and especially Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4. 1, 2. 4. So the Phālguna full moon is called the ‘month of the seasons’ (''ṛtūnām mukham'') in [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, viii. 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 6, 9.</ref> of the correspondence of Phālguna and the beginning of spring: as we have seen above in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], the new moon in Māgha is placed at the winter solstice,<ref name=fx144_ve1_1496> xix. 2. 3.</ref> which puts the full moon of [[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]] at a month and a half after the winter solstice, or in the first week of February, a date not in itself improbable for about B.C. 800, and corresponding with the February 7 of the ''veris initium'' in the Roman Calendar. This fact accords with the only natural division of the year into three periods of four months, as the rainy season lasts from June 7-10 to October 7-10, and it is certain that the second set of four months dates from the beginning of the rains (see '''[[चातुर्मास्य|Cāturmāsya]]'''). Tilak,<ref name=fx145_ve1_1496> ''Orion,'' 53 ''et seq.;<br>'' 198 ''et seq.''</ref> on the other hand, holds that the winter solstice coincided with Māghī full moon at the time of the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (B.C. 2350), and had coincided with Phālgunī and Caitrī in early periods--viz., B.C. 4000-2500, and B.C. 60004000.<br><br>(5) The passages of the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx146_ve1_1496> vii. 4, 8, 1.</ref> and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx147_ve1_1496> v. 9. See Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 341344;<br> Thibaut, ''Indian Antiquary,'' 24, 85 ''et seq.,'' for a full discussion of the points raised by Tilak, ''Orion,'' 43 ''et seq.''</ref> which treat the full moon in Phālguna as the beginning of the year, give as an alternative the full moon in [[चैत्र|Caitra]]. Probably the latter month was chosen so as to secure that the initial day should fall well within the season of spring,<ref name=fx148_ve1_1496> Thibaut, ''Indian Antiquary,'' 24, 93. On the other side, Tilak, 198 ''et seq.''</ref> and was not, as Jacobi believes, a relic of a period  when the winter solstice corresponded with [[चैत्र|Caitra]]. Another alternative is the [[एकाष्टका|Ekāṣṭakā]], interpreted by the commentators as the eighth day after the full moon in [[मघास्|Maghās]], a time which might, as being the last quarter of the waning half of the old year, well be considered as representing the end of the year. A fourth alternative is the fourth day before full moon; the full moon meant must be that of [[चैत्र|Caitra]], as Ālekhana quoted by Āpastamba held, not of Māgha, as Āśmarathya, Laugākṣi and the Mīmāṃsists believed, and as Tilak believes.<ref name=fx149_ve1_1496> Thibaut, ''op. cit.,'' 94;<br> Tilak, 51 ''et seq. Cf.'' also Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 1. 8-10;<br> Weber, 2, 343, n. 2, 344.</ref><br><br>(6) Others, again, according to the [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] ritual, began the year with the month Mārgaśīrṣa, as is shown by its other name Āgrahāyaṇa<ref name=fx150_ve1_1496> Thibaut, ''op. cit.,'' 94, 95. ''Cf.'' Weber, 2, 332-334.</ref> (‘belonging to the commencement of the year’). Jacobi and Tilak<ref name=fx151_ve1_1496> Tilak's view is given in ''Orion,'' 62 ''et seq.'' It is based mainly on Amara's (i. 2, 23) ''āgra-hāyaṇā'' as a synonym of [[मृगशिरस्|Mṛgaśiras]], and on certain myths (chaps. v.-vii.);<br> he equates (221 ''et seq.'') Āgrayaṇa and Orion (!).</ref> think that this one denoted the autumn equinox in [[मृगशिरस्|Mṛgaśiras]], corresponding to the winter solstice in [[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]]. But, as Thibaut<ref name=fx152_ve1_1496> ''Op. cit.,'' 94, 95.</ref> shows clearly, it was selected as the beginning of a year that was taken to commence with autumn, just as some took the spring to commence with [[चैत्र|Caitra]] instead of Phālguna.<ref name=fx153_ve1_1496> A corresponding Kārttika year is not early, Thibaut, ''op. cit.,'' 96. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 334.</ref><br><br>(7) Jacobi has also argued, with the support of Bühler,<ref name=fx154_ve1_1496> ''Indian Antiquary,'' 23, 242 ''et seq.''</ref> from the terms given for the beginning of Vedic study in the [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] Sūtras, on the principle that study commenced with the rains (as in the Buddhist ''vassā'') which mark the summer solstice. He concludes that if Bhādrapada appears as the date of commencing study in some texts, it was fixed thus because at one time Proṣṭhapadās (the early name of Bhadrapadās) coincided with the summer solstice, this having been the case when the winter solstice was in Phālguna. But Whitney<ref name=fx155_ve1_1496> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, lxxxiv ''et seq.''</ref> has pointed out that this argument is utterly illegitimate; we cannot say that there was any necessary connexion between the rains and learning--a month like Śrāvaṇa might be preferred  because of its connexion with the word [[श्रवण|Śravaṇa]], ‘ear’--and in view of the precession of the equinoxes, we must assume that Bhādrapada was kept because of its traditional coincidence with the beginning of the rains after it had ceased actually so to coincide.<ref name=fx156_ve1_1496> Mention should here be made of the following points: (1) Jacobi's argument from the word [[ध्रुव|Dhruva]], the name of the star pointed out to the bride in the marriage ritual. The word does not occur in the literature anterior to the [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] Sūtras, and it must remain an undecided question whether the practice was or was not old. Jacobi urges that [[ध्रुव|Dhruva]] means ‘fixed,’ and that it must originally have referred to a real fixed pole star, and he thinks that such a star could only be found in the third millennium B.C. Whitney and Oldenberg definitely reject this view on the ground that too much must not be made out of a piece of folk-lore, and that the marriage ritual requirements would be satisfied by any star of some magnitude which was approximately polar. This conclusion seems convincing. ''Cf.'' Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 1102;<br> 1910, 465;<br> ''contra,'' Jacobi, ''ibid.,'' 1909, 726 ''et seq.;<br>'' 1910, 464. (2) The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 2, 3, asserts that the [[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]] do not move from the eastern quarter, which the others do;<br> and stress has been laid (by Jacobi, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1910, 463, 464) upon this assertion as giving a date of the third millennium B.C. for the Śatapatha observation. But this notice is quite inadequate to support any such result, and its lack of trustworthiness as a chronological guide is increased by the fact that the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xviii 5, has a similar notice, coupled with another notice, which, according to Barth, would only be true somewhere in or after the sixth century A.D., the equatorial point being placed between [[चित्रा|Citrā]] and [[स्वाती|Svātī]], which in the early period were both very much north of the equator (see Caland, ''Über das rituelle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 37-39). The same passage of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 2, 2, in the Mādhyaṃdina recension, states that the number of the [[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]] is greater than that of the stars in any of the other Nakṣatras, which consist of one, two, three, or four stars, or which, according to the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension (see Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 282, n. 2), have four stars. It is not possible to put much faith in this assertion, for [[हस्त|Hasta]] later has five stars, and its name (with reference to the fingers) suggests five (''cf.'' Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 368, 381), and that number is possibly referred to in the Rigveda (i. 105, 10). See Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 177. (3) Attempts have been made to regard the names of the Nakṣatras as significant of their position in the list. Thus Bentley, ''Historical View,'' 2, thought Viśākhā was so called because the equinoctial colure divided the equator about 1426 B.C.;<br> this is refuted by Tilak, ''Orion,'' 57 ''et seq.'' [[ज्येष्ठघ्नी|Jyeṣṭhaghnī]] has been interpreted as ‘slaying the eldest’--''i.e.,'' as marking the new year by putting an end to the old year. Tilak, 90, suggests that [[मूल|Mūla]] was so called because its acronycal rising marked the beginning of the year when the vernal equinox was near [[मृगशिरस्|Mṛgaśiras]]. More probable is Whitney's view, ''Sārya Siddhānta,'' 194, that it was the most southern, and so, as it were, the basis of the asterisms.</ref><br><br>''The Origin of the Nakṣatras.''--As we have seen, there is no evidence showing the process by which the Nakṣatras may  have originated in India. They are mentioned only as stars in the earlier parts of the Rigveda, then the names of three of them are found in the latest parts of that Saṃhitā, and finally in the later Atharvaveda and in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās the full list appears. It may also be noted that the Vedic Indians show (see '''[[ग्रह|Graha]]''') a remarkably small knowledge of the other astronomical phenomena; the discovery of a series of 27 lunar mansions by them would therefore be rather surprising. On the other hand, the nature of such an operation is not very complicated; it consists merely in selecting a star or a star group with which the moon is in conjunction. It is thus impossible ''a priori'' to deny that the Vedic Indians could have invented for themselves a lunar Zodiac.<ref name=fx157_ve1_1496> Max Müller, ''Rigveda,'' 4^2, xliv ''et seq.,'' maintains the Indian origin of the system. Thrbaut, ''Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik,'' 14, 15, admits it to be possible, as does Whitney, ''Oriental and Linguistic Essays,'' 2, 418.</ref><br><br>But the question is complicated by the fact that there exist two similar sets of 28 stars or star groups in Arabia and in China, the Manāzil and the Sieou. The use of the Manāzil in Arabia is consistent and effective; the calendar is regulated by them, and the position of the asterisms corresponds best with the positions required for a lunar Zodiac. The Indians might therefore have borrowed the system from Arabia, but that is a mere possibility, because the evidence for the existence of the Manāzil is long posterior to that for the existence of the Nakṣatras, while again the Mazzaroth or Mazzaloth of the Old Testament<ref name=fx158_ve1_1496> 2 Kings xxiii. 5;<br> Job xxxviii. 32.</ref> may really be the lunar mansions.<ref name=fx159_ve1_1496> Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 1, 317, 318;<br> Whitney, ''op, cit.,'' 359.</ref> That the Arabian system is borrowed from India, as Burgess<ref name=fx160_ve1_1496> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 8, 309-334. This was Weber's view also, according to Whitney, 413 ''et seq.;<br>'' but Weber himself disclaimed it (see ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 425, 426;<br> 10, 246, 247). On the other hand, Sédillot, ''Matériaux pour servir à l'histoire comparée des 'Sciences Mathématiques par les Grecs et les Orientaux'' (Paris, 1845-1849), favoured influence from Arabia on India.</ref> held, is, on the other hand, not at all probable.<br><br>Biot, the eminent Chinese scholar, in a series of papers published by him between 1839 and 1861,<ref name=fx161_ve1_1496> Summed up in his two works, ''Recherches sur l'ancienne astronomie Chinoise,'' and ''Études sur l'astronomie Indieune et l'astronomie Chinoise.''</ref> attempted to prove  the derivation of the [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] from the Chinese Sieou. The latter he did not regard as being in origin lunar mansions at all. He thought that they were equatorial stars used, as in modern astronomy, as a standard to which planets or other stars observed in the neighbourhood can be eferred; they were, as regards twenty-four of them, selecte about B.C. 2357 on account of their proximity to the equator, and of their having the same right ascension as certain circumpolar stars which had attracted the attention of Chinese observers. Four more were added in B.C. 1100 in order to mark the equinoxes and solstices of the period. He held that the list of stars commenced with Mao (= [[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]]), which was at the vernal equinox in B.C. 2357. Weber,<ref name=fx162_ve1_1496> ''Naxatra,'' 1, 284 ''et seq.'' (1860).</ref> in an elaborate essay of 1860, disputed this theory, and endeavoured to show that the Chinese literary evidence for the Sieou was late, dating not even from before the third century B.C. The last point does not appear<ref name=fx163_ve1_1496> See Chavannes, cited by Oldenberg, ''Nachrichten der ko7nigl. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Gōttingen,'' 1909, 566, 567.</ref> to be correct, but his objections against the basis of Biot's theory were reinforced by Whitney,<ref name=fx164_ve1_1496> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 8, 1 ''et seq.;<br> Oriental and Linguistic Essays,'' 2, 385 ''et seq.'' For his controversy with Weber, see Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 424 ''et seq.;<br>'' 10, 213 ''et seq.;<br>'' Whitney, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 8, 384 ''et seq.''</ref> who insisted that Biot's supposition of the Sieou's not having been ultimately derived from a system of lunar mansions, was untenable. This is admitted by the latest defender of the hypothesis of borrowing from China, Léopold de Saussure,<ref name=fx165_ve1_1496> T'oung Pao, 1909, 121 ''et seq.;<br>'' 255 ''et seq.''</ref> , but his arguments in favour of a Chinese origin for the Indian lunar mansions have been refuted by Oldenberg,<ref name=fx166_ve1_1496> ''Nachrichten,'' 1909, 544-572.</ref> who has also pointed out<ref name=fx167_ve1_1496> ''Ibid.,'' 548, n. 9.</ref> that the series does not begin with Mao (= [[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]]).<br><br>There remains only the possibility that a common source for all the three sets--[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]], Manāzil, and Sieou--may be found in Babylonia. Hommel<ref name=fx168_ve1_1496> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gesellschaft,'' 45, 592 ''et seq.''</ref> has endeavoured to show that recent research has established in Babylonia the existence of a lunar zodiac of twenty-four members headed by the  Pleiades (= [[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]]); but Thibaut's researches<ref name=fx169_ve1_1496> ''Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,'' 63. 144-163. ''Cf. Astronomie,'' etc., 15;<br> Oldenberg, ''op. cit.,'' 572.</ref> are not favourable to this claim. On the other hand, Weber,<ref name=fx170_ve1_1496> ''Naxatra,'' 1, 316 ''et seq.;<br> Indische Studien,'' 10, 246, and elsewhere. Weber, ''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]],'' 2, 362, 400, laid great stress on the fact that the [[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]], 8, referred to the difference of the longest and shortest day as being six ''muhūrtas,'' which makes the longest day fourteen hours twenty-four minutes: and he compared the Babylonian day of fourteen hours twenty-five minutes, and a Chinese day of fourteen hours twentyfour minutes. But Whitney, ''Oriental and Linguistic Essays,'' 2, 417, 418, shows that no stress can be laid on this argument, since the correspondence is only approximate, and the latitudes of the Babylonian and Chinese observations are approximately the same.</ref> Whitney,<ref name=fx171_ve1_1496> See ''op. cit.,'' 2, 418-420.</ref> Zimmer,<ref name=fx172_ve1_1496> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 356, 357, where he is quite confident of the Semitic origin of the Nakṣatras.</ref> and Oldenberg<ref name=fx173_ve1_1496> ''Op. cit.,'' 572.</ref> all incline to the view that in Babylonia is to be found the origin of the system, and this must for the present be regarded as the most probable view, for there are other traces of Babylonian influence in Vedic literature, such as the legend of the flood, perhaps the Ādityas,<ref name=fx174_ve1_1496> For the flood, see Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 101, 357, who is opposed to Weber's view (''Indische Studien,'' 1, 160;<br> ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 11) that the story preserves an old Āryan tradition, and a reminiscence of the home of the Indians beyond the Himālaya (''cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 190;<br> 2^2, 323, n. 96;<br> Lassen, ''Indische Alterthumskunde,'' 1^2, 638, and ''cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 276, n. 3). For the Ādityas, see Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 185 ''et seq.;<br> Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 50, 43 ''et seq.'' His view is not accepted by Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 44;<br> Bloomfield, ''Religion of the Veda,'' 133. Still more doubtful is Zimmer's view (''Altindisches Leben,'' 363, 364) of the division of day and night into thirty parts, which he sees in Rv. i. 123, 8, and which he thinks is based on the Babylonian division of the same period of time into sixtieths. ''Cf.'' also V. Smith, ''Indian Antiquary,'' 34, 230, who argues, but inconclusively, that the use of iron was introduced from Babylonia.<br><br>The facts about the Nakṣatras are (with the exception of the data from the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā and the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]) collected in Weber's second essay, ''Die vedischen Nachrichten von den Naxatra,'' 1861. The first essay, 1860, deals with the problem of origins. See also his discussions in ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 424 ''et seq.;<br>'' 10, 213 ''et seq.'' Whitney's work lies partly in his scientific determination (in many places correcting Colebrooke's discoveries) of the later Naxatras in his edition and version of the [[सूर्य|Sūrya]] Siddhānta (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 6), and partly in his discussions of the question of origin (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 8), ''Oriental and Linguistic Essays,'' 2, 341-421 (with a stellar chart), and of the question of date as against Jacobi and Tilak's ''Orion'' (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, lxxxii ''et seq.''). The views of Max Müller are found in his ''Rigveda,'' 4^2, xxxiv ''et seq.'' The modern discussion of the dates inferable from the [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] was inaugurated by Jacobi (1893) in the ''Festgruss an Roth,'' 68-74 (translated in the ''Indian Antiquary,'' 23). See also his articles in the ''Nachrichten der kōnigl. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Gōttingen,'' 1894, 110 ''et seq.;<br> Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 49, 218 ''et seq.;<br>'' 50, 70 ''et seq.;<br> Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 721727. Independently Tilak, in his ''Orion,'' developed similar views;<br> but most of his special points are disposed of by Whitney in his review cited above. Oldenberg has discussed and refuted Jacobi's arguments in the ''Zeitschrift,'' 48, 629 ''et seq.;<br>'' 49, 470 ''et seq.;<br>'' 50, 450 ''et seq.;<br> Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 1090 ''et seq.'' Thibaut has also rejected Jacobi's views in an article in the ''Indian Antiquary,'' 24, 85 ''et seq.'' See also his ''Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik,'' 17-19. The recent literature on the origin of the Nakṣatras consists of articles by Thibaut, ''Journa of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,'' 63, 144 ''et seq.;<br>'' Saussure, ''Toung Pao,'' 1909, 121 ''et seq.;<br>'' 255 ''et seq.;<br>'' Oldenberg, ''Nachrichten der ko7nigl. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Go7ttingen,'' 1909, 544 ''et seq.'' The Nakṣatras in the Epic are dealt with by Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 24, 29-36. Ludwig's views are given in his Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 183 ''et seq.''</ref> and possibly the word '''[[मना|Manā]].''' 

नक्षत्र-दर्श
<u>'''Nakṣatra-darśa'''</u> (‘gazer at the lunar mansions’), an ‘astrologer,’ is mentioned in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha, or ‘human sacrifice,’ in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1497> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 10;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 4, 1.</ref> A notice in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1497> ii. 1, 2, 19, and ''cf.'' the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] text in Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' xii, 288, n. 3.</ref> indicates that that work regarded the practice of choosing a particular [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] under which to set up the sacrificial fires as an idle one, because it decides in favour of choosing the sun as one's [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].

नक्षत्र-विद्या
<u>'''Nakṣatra-vidyā,'''</u> the ‘science of the lunar mansions,’ ‘astronomy,’ is mentioned with other sciences in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vii. 1, 2. 4; 2, 1; 7, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

नख
<u>'''Nakha'''</u> denotes either the ‘nail’ of a man,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1499> Rv. i. 162, 9;<br> x. 163, 5;<br> Av. ii. 33, 6, etc.</ref> or the ‘claw’ of a wild beast, such as a tiger.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1499> Rv. iv. 3, 3. ''Cf.'' x. 28, 10, of the eagle's talon.</ref> The trimming (''nikṛntana'')<ref name=fx3_ve1_1499> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 6.</ref> of the nails was a regular part of the toilet of the Vedic Indian, especially on occasions of special sanctity, when it accompanied the cleansing of the teeth.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1499> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 1, 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 6, 2, etc.;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 3, 4.</ref> 

न-ग
<u>'''Na-ga'''</u> (‘not moving’), ‘mountain,’ is a word occurring only in a late book of the Atharvaveda (xix. 8, 1), and then in the Sūtras.<br>==Foot Notes==

नगर
<u>'''Nagara'''</u> is in early Vedic literature found only in the derivative adjective, used as a proper name, '''Nagarin,''' but it appears in the sense of ‘town’ in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka (i. 11, 18; 31, 4), and frequently in the later language.<br>==Foot Notes==

नगरिन् जान-श्रुतेय
<u>'''Nagarin [[जान|Jāna]]-śruteya'''</u> (‘descendant of Janaśruti’) is mentioned as a priest in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (v. 30), and as [[नगरिन् जानश्रुतेय|Nagarin Jānaśruteya]] [[काण्ड्विय|Kāṇḍviya]] in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 40, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

नग्न-जित्
<u>'''Nagna-jit,'''</u> King of '''[[गन्धार|Gandhāra]],''' is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1503> vii. 34.</ref> as having been consecrated by '''[[पर्वत|Parvata]]''' and '''[[नारद|Nārada]].''' The same king is mentioned with his son '''Svarjit''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_1503> viii. 1, 4, 10. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 132, 134;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 515.</ref> where a remark attributed to one of them on a ritual topic is treated with contempt.

नग्ना
<u>'''Nagnā.'''</u> See '''[[धर्म|Dharma]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

नघ-मार
<u>'''Nagha-māra'''</u> and '''Naghā-riṣa.''' See 1. '''[[कुष्ठ|Kuṣṭha]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

न-चिकेतस्
<u>'''Na-ciketas'''</u> occurs in the well-known legend of the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1506> iii. 11, 8.</ref> (where he is a [[गोतम|Gotama]], the son of '''[[वाजश्रवस|Vājaśravasa]]'''), and in the Kaṭha [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1506> i. 1, etc. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 154, n, 1;<br> Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 157;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 168.</ref> His historical reality is extremely doubtful: in the [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] he is called son of [[आरुणि|Āruṇi]] [[औद्दालकि|Auddālaki]] or [[वाजश्रवस|Vājaśravasa]], an impossible attribution, and one due only to a desire to give [[नचिकेतस्|Naciketas]] a connexion with the famous [[आरुणि|Āruṇi]]. 

नड
<u>'''1. Naḍa,'''</u> ‘reed,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1507> viii. 1, 33.</ref> as growing in lakes, and in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1507> iv. 19, 1.</ref> is described as ''vārṣika,'' ‘produced in the rains.’ Reeds were used, after being split, for making mats, a work carried out by women.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1507> Av. vi. 138, 5.</ref> They are frequently mentioned elsewhere.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1507> Av. vi. 137, 2;<br> xii. 2, 1, 19. 50. 54;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxv. 7;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 4, 19;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, vi. 7, 10.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 71.</ref> See also '''Nada.'''

नड नैषध
<u>'''2. Naḍa Naiṣadha'''</u> is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1508> ii. 2, 2, 1. 2.</ref> where he seems to be<ref name=fx2_ve1_1508> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 225-227, followed by Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 338, notes 4 and 5. The printed text has [[नैषिध|Naiṣidha]] by error.</ref> a human king who is compared with Yama, the god of death, because of his conquests. Being there identified with the southern sacrificial fire, he was presumably a king of the south, just as Yama is connected with the south.

नड्वला
<u>'''Naḍvalā,'''</u> a ‘reed bed,’ is mentioned in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā (xxx. 16) and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 4, 12, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

नद
<u>'''Nada'''</u> is found in several passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1510> i. 32, 8;<br> 179, 4;<br> ii. 34, 3;<br> viii. 69, 2;<br> x. 11, 2;<br> 105, 4. ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 2.</ref> but its sense is still obscure. It is identified by Pischel<ref name=fx2_ve1_1510> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 35, 717 ''et seq.;<br> Vedische Studien,'' 1, 183 ''et seq.''</ref> with '''[[नड|Naḍa]],''' being explained by him in one passage<ref name=fx3_ve1_1510> i. 32, 8. Here Caland and Henry, ''L'Agniṣṭoma,'' 312, n., would read ''naḷam.'' See also Wackernagel, ''Altindische Grammatik,'' 1, 173.</ref> as a reed boat, which is split, and over which the waters go; in another<ref name=fx4_ve1_1510> ii. 34, 3, followed by Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 301 (who, however, does not construe ''āśubhiḥ,'' ‘sharp,’ with ''karṇaiḥ'' as Pischel does in ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 190). He sees ‘reed’ also in x. 11, 2, but ‘horse’ in x. 105, 4.</ref> as a reed whip, of which the sharp points (''karṇa'') are used to urge horses on; and in others<ref name=fx5_ve1_1510> i. 179, 4;<br> viii. 69, 2.</ref> again as figuratively designating the penis. Roth<ref name=fx6_ve1_1510> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' The sense of ‘bull’ seems imperative in viii. 89, 2;<br> it is admissible in i. 179, 4, where ‘bull’ may denote a man, and in x. 11, 2, and possibly in i. 32, 8, but ‘reed’ there seems far more likely.</ref> takes the sense to be ‘bull’ (either literally or meta-  phorically) in all passages. Once at least<ref name=fx7_ve1_1510> x. 105, 4. and in x. 11, 2. The latter passage suggests that ‘river’ may, after all, be the sense there.<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 32, 178, 215.</ref> the ‘neigher’ (from the root ''nad,'' ‘sound’) seems to be meant with reference to Indra's horse. In the phrase ''nadasya karṇaiḥ''^8 the sense is, perhaps, ‘through the ears of the (side) horse’ (that is, by their being ready to hear the word of command) of their chariot, the Maruts ‘hasten on with their swift steeds’ (''turayanta āśubhiḥ'').

नदी
<u>'''Nadī,'''</u> ‘stream,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1511> i. 158, 5;<br> ii. 35, 3;<br> iii. 33, 4;<br> v. 46, 6, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1511> Av. iii. 13, 1;<br> xiv. 1, 43.</ref> Reference is made to shallows (''gādha'')<ref name=fx3_ve1_1511> Rv. vii. 60, 7.</ref> in the river's bed, to the opposite bank (''[[पार|pāra]]''),<ref name=fx4_ve1_1511> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 1, 6, 6.</ref> and to the bathing of horses in streams.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1511> Rv. viii. 2, 2.</ref> Rivers are also mentioned in close connexion with mountains.<ref name=fx6_ve1_1511> Rv. v. 55, 7;<br> x. 64, 8.</ref> The title [[नदी|Nadī]]-pati, ‘lord of rivers,’<ref name=fx7_ve1_1511> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 4, 10.</ref> is once used to express ‘ocean’ or ‘sea-water.’

नना
<u>'''Nanā'''</u> is a familiar name for mother, parallel with '''Tata,''' for father, with which it is found in a verse of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1512> ix. 112, 3. ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 6, and see '''[[उपल-प्रक्षिणी|Upala-prakṣiṇī]].'''</ref> describing the occupations of the parents of the poet.

ननान्दृ
<u>'''Nanāndṛ'''</u> is a word occurring only once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1513> x. 85, 46.</ref> where it denotes, according to Sāyaṇa, the ‘husband's sister,’ over whom the wife is to rule. This interpretation is confirmed by the fact that the same position is ascribed to the husband's sister--no doubt while unmarried and living in her brother's care--by the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1513> iii. 22.<br><br>''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 516. The native lexicographers recognize the word, though its occurrence in the later literature is very rare (it has been noted in the Uttararāmacarita). See the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> 

नपात्
<u>'''Napāt'''</u> in Vedic literature apparently has both the wider sense of ‘descendant,’<ref name=fx1_ve1_1514> It is equivalent to ‘son’ in a number of mythological epithets such as ''apāṃ [[नपात्|napāt]],'' ‘son of waters.’</ref> and the narrower one of ‘grandson’ in the Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1514> Rv. x. 10, 1, clearly ‘son’;<br> vi. 20, 11, may be ‘grandson.’ Most passages, vi. 50, 15;<br> vii. 18, 22;<br> viii. 65, 12;<br> 102, 7;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxi. 61;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxii. 2, require ‘descendant.’</ref> In the Brāhmaṇas the word seems hardly to have the sense of ‘descendant’ at all, while it denotes not only ‘grandson,’<ref name=fx3_ve1_1514> As in [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 48;<br> ''[[पुत्र|putra]]-naptāraḥ.'' ‘sons and grandsons.’ ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], viii. 5.</ref> but also ‘great-grandson’ in the sequence ‘sons, grandsons, great-grandsons’ (''putrān, pautrān, naptṝn'').<ref name=fx4_ve1_1514> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 10, 3;<br> Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 11, 5.</ref> ‘Grandson’ is also expressed by [[पौत्र|Pautra]] (‘son's son’) in the Atharvaveda and later,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1514> Av. ix. 5, 30;<br> xi. 7, 16;<br> Aitarey [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 10, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 8, 3.</ref> while the sense of ‘great-grandson’ is accurately conveyed as early as the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve1_1514> Rv. viii. 17, 13, with ''[[नपात्|napāt]].''</ref> by [[प्र-णपात्|Pra-ṇapāt]], used beside [[नपात्|Napāt]], ‘grandson.’ Naptī, the feminine, is practically limited to the Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx7_ve1_1514> Rv. iii. 31, 1 ([[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 4);<br> viii. 2, 42. ''Cf.'' i. 50, 9;<br> ix. 9, 1;<br> 14, 5;<br> 69, 3;<br> Av. i. 28, 4;<br> ii. 14, 1;<br> vii. 82, 6.</ref> and denotes ‘daughter.’ The use in the Veda throws no light on the original use of the word.<ref name=fx8_ve1_1514> Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 403-405;<br> Lanmann, ''Festgruss an Bo7htlingk,'' 77.</ref>

नप्त्री
<u>'''Naptrī,'''</u> as feminine of '''[[नपात्|Napāt]],''' is found in the [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]], Āraṇya (v. 13).<br>==Foot Notes==

नभ(स्) नभस्य
<u>'''Nabha(s) Nabhasya.'''</u> See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

नभाक
<u>'''Nabhāka'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] who is referred to in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1517> viii. 40, 4. 5.</ref> and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1517> vi. 24.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 107.</ref> The Anukramaṇī (Index) attributes to '''[[नाभाक|Nābhāka]]''' the composition of several hymns of the Rigveda (viii. 39-42). 

नभ्य
<u>'''Nabhya,'''</u> the ‘nave’ of the wheel, is mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1518> vi. 70, 3;<br> xii. 1, 12.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1518> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 15;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 3, 20;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 4;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 3, 23, etc.</ref> See also '''[[नाभि|Nābhi]].'''

नमी साप्य
<u>'''Namī Sāpya'''</u> is the name of a man in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1519> vi. 20, 6;<br> x. 48, 9. Simply Namī in i. 53, 7.</ref> Weber<ref name=fx2_ve1_1519> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 231, 232.</ref> thinks that he is mentioned as a priest, but the passages suit a king better, and in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1519> xxv. 10, 17.</ref> he appears as [[नमी साप्य|Namī Sāpya]], ''Vaidcho rājā,'' ‘King of [[विदेह|Videha]].’ In one passage<ref name=fx4_ve1_1519> Rv. i. 53, 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 149;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 161;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 49. [[साप्य|Sāpya]] may be read [[साय्य|Sāyya]], but Sāyaṇa recognizes the ''p;<br>'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutscheu Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 55, 328.</ref> he is represented as engaged in the contest against Namuci.

नर
<u>'''Nara, Nṛ.'''</u>--The general name for ‘man’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1520> i. 25, 5;<br> 167, 20;<br> 178, 3;<br> ii. 34, 6;<br> iii. 16, 4, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1520> Av. ii. 9, 2;<br> ix. 1, 3;<br> xiv. 2, 9;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 34;<br> vi. 27. 32, etc.</ref> is [[नृ|Nṛ]], while Nara<ref name=fx3_ve1_1520> This form of the word, common in the post-Vedic language, is secondary, having originated from cases like ''naram,'' understood as ''nara-m;<br>'' but its origin goes back to the Indo-Iranian period. See Brugmann, ''Grundriss,'' 2, 106. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' 318, ''a'' 5.</ref> is found occasionally in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1520> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 12, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 3, 1, 3;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 1, etc.</ref>

नराची
<u>'''Narācī'''</u> occurs once in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1521> v. 31, 4. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 286.</ref> perhaps meaning a poisonous plant.

नर्य
<u>'''Narya'''</u> (‘manly’) is in two passages of the Rigveda (i. 54, 6; 112, 9) understood by the commentator Sāyaṇa as the proper name of a man. See also '''[[नार्य|Nārya]].''' <br>==Foot Notes==

नलद
<u>'''Nalada,'''</u> ‘nard’ (''Nardastachys Jatamansi'') is a plant mentioned in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1523> vi. 102, 3.</ref> in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1523> iii. 2, 4.</ref> and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1523> xi. 4.</ref> Āraṇyakas (where it is mentioned as used for a garland), as well as in the Sūtras. In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_1523> iv. 37, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 68, 69;<br> Grohmann, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 420;<br> Caland, ''Altindisches Zauberritual,'' 177, n. 4.</ref> the feminine form of the word, Naladī, occurs as the name of an Apsaras, or celestial nymph.

नवक
<u>'''Navaka'''</u> is mentioned as having wished for a wife at the Sattra of the '''Vibhindukīyas''' in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1524> ii. 233 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 38).</ref>

नव-ग्व
<u>'''Nava-gva'''</u> occurs in several passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1525> iv. 51, 4;<br> ix. 108, 4;<br> x. 62, 6.</ref> as a man, an [[अङ्गिरस्|Aṅgiras]] in the highest degree (''Aṅgirastama''),<ref name=fx2_ve1_1525> x. 62, 6.</ref> apparently being the type of the Navagvas,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1525> Rv. i. 62, 4;<br> iii. 39, 5;<br> v. 29, 12;<br> 45, 7. 11;<br> vi. 22, 2;<br> x. 14, 6;<br> 61, 10;<br> 108, 8;<br> Av. xiv. 1, 56;<br> xviii. 3, 20, etc.</ref> who appear as a mystic race of olden times, coupled with, and conceived probably as related to, the Aṅgirases. They are often associated with the '''Daśagvas.'''<ref name=fx4_ve1_1525> Rv. i. 62, 4;<br> iv. 51, 4;<br> v. 29, 12;<br> x. 62, 6, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig. Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 165;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 144 (B), 170.</ref>

नव-नीत
<u>'''Nava-nīta,'''</u> ‘fresh butter,’ is mentioned frequently in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_1526> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā. ii. 3, 10, 1;<br> vi. 1, 1, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 4, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1526> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 3, 7. 8;<br> v. 3, 2, 6;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 3.</ref> According to the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1526> i. 3.</ref> this is the kind of butter which is fitted for anointing an embryo (''garbha''), while the gods receive '''[[आज्य|Ājya]],''' men fragrant ghee ('''[[घृत|Ghṛta]]'''), and the fathers '''[[आयुत|Āyuta]].''' Elsewhere<ref name=fx4_ve1_1526> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 10, 1, etc</ref> it is contrasted with [[घृत|Ghṛta]] and '''[[सर्पिस्|Sarpis]].''' 

नव-वास्त्व
<u>'''Nava-vāstva'''</u> appears in three passages of the Rigveda. In one<ref name=fx1_ve1_1527> i. 36, 18.</ref> he seems to be a protégé of Agni; in another<ref name=fx2_ve1_1527> vi. 20, 11.</ref> as perhaps a son of '''Uśanas''' and favourite of Indra, but in the last he seems to be defeated, or even slain, by Indra.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1527> x. 49, 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bergaigne, ''Religion Védique,'' 2, 223;<br> Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 581;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 128, 129;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 147;<br> ''Uber die neuesten Arbeiten auf dem Gebiete der Ṛgvedaforschung,'' 160;<br> Perry, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 11, 202;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 158.</ref> But he may be a mythic figure altogether. ''Cf.'' also '''[[बृहद्रथ|Bṛhadratha]].'''

नह्
<u>'''Nah'''</u> has been taken by Roth<ref name=fx1_ve1_1528> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> and Grassmann<ref name=fx2_ve1_1528> ''Wo7rterbuch, s.v.''</ref> to be the stem, meaning ‘bond,’ of the dative form ''nadbhyas,'' which occurs once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1528> x. 60, 6.</ref> and which Sieg<ref name=fx4_ve1_1528> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 129.</ref> thinks means ‘sister's sons.’ But the sense of this dative is probably rather ‘to the grandsons.’<ref name=fx5_ve1_1528> Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 56, 3''b.''</ref>

नहुस्
<u>'''Nahus'''</u> occurs several times in the Rigveda, but the exact sense is not certain. Ludwig<ref name=fx1_ve1_1529> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 206.</ref> sees in the [[नहुस्|Nahus]] a tribe on the '''[[सिन्धु|Sindhu]]''' (Indus)<ref name=fx2_ve1_1529> Rv. i. 31, 11;<br> vi. 22, 10;<br> 46, 7;<br> x. 80, 6.</ref> or '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]],'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1529> Rv. vii. 95, 2. ''Cf.'' ix. 88, 2;<br> 91, 2.</ref> rich in horses,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1529> Rv. viii. 6, 24.</ref> allied with the '''Bharatas''' and '''Śimyus,'''<ref name=fx5_ve1_1529> Rv. i. 100, 18;<br> vii. 18, 5.</ref> connected with '''[[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]]''' and the '''Vārṣāgiras,'''<ref name=fx6_ve1_1529> Rv. i. 100, 16. 17.</ref> and having as kings '''[[मशर्शार|Maśarśāra]]''' and '''[[आयवस|Āyavasa]].'''<ref name=fx7_ve1_1529> Rv. i. 122, 15. ''Cf.'' also ''nahuṣo viśaḥ,'' Rv. vii. 6, 5;<br> x. 49, 8;<br> 99, 7, etc.</ref> Roth,<ref name=fx8_ve1_1529> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> on the other hand, sees in [[नहुस्|Nahus]] the general sense of ‘neighbour’ as opposed to a member of one's own people ('''[[विश्|Viś]]'''); this interpretation is supported by the occurrence of the phrase ''nahuṣo nahuṣṭara,''<ref name=fx9_ve1_1529> Rv. x. 49, 8. ''Cf.'' also viii. 8, 3.</ref> ‘closer than a neighbour.’ Nahuṣa has the same sense as [[नहुस्|Nahus]] in two passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx10_ve1_1529> i. 31, 11;<br> v. 12, 6.</ref> but in  one it seems to be intended for the proper name of a man.<ref name=fx11_ve1_1529> Rv. viii. 46, 27.</ref> Possibly [[नहुस्|Nahus]] was originally a man like Manu.<ref name=fx12_ve1_1529> Oldenberg, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 46, 28;<br> Bergaigne, ''Religion Védique,'' 2, 324. But [[नहुस्|Nahus]], if it was originally the name of a mythic forefather, cannot have been that of a forefather recognized by all the tribes, for there is no passage in which it applies to all men. Geldner, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]], Glossar,'' 92, regards [[नहुस्|Nahus]] as a tribe, Nahuṣa as a king. Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 128, leaves the question open. ''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 165, n. 7;<br> 179 ''et seq.;<br>'' 307 ''et seq.''</ref>

नाक
<u>'''1. Nāka'''</u> denotes the ‘firmament’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1530> i. 60, 10;<br> 125, 5;<br> iii. 2, 12;<br> iv. 13, 5;<br> vii. 86, 1;<br> 99, 2;<br> viii. 103, 2;<br> ix. 73, 4, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1530> Av. vii. 18, 1;<br> xviii. 2, 47;<br> xiii. 1, 7;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xv. 10;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xviii. 7, 10;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 5, 3, 4, etc.</ref> It is often used with the epithet ‘highest’ (''uttama'')<ref name=fx3_ve1_1530> Av. iv. 14, 6;<br> xi. 1, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ix. 10;<br> xii. 63.</ref> or ‘third’ (''tṛtīya'')<ref name=fx4_ve1_1530> Av. vi. 122, 4;<br> ix. 5, 1. 4;<br> xviii. 4, 3.</ref> referring to the threefold division of heaven, parallel to the threefold division of earth, atmosphere, and sky ('''Div'''). The [[नाक|Nāka]] is said to be on the third ridge (''pṛṣṭha''), above the luminous space (''rocana'') of the sky.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1530> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xv. 50.</ref> Elsewhere<ref name=fx6_ve1_1530> Av. iv. 14, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvii. 67. In Rv. x. 121, 5, the earth and sky (''dyauḥ''), and heaven (''svar''), and the firmament (''[[नाक|nāka]]''), are all mentioned.</ref> the series earth, atmosphere, sky, and the firmament (''[[नाक|nāka]]''), heaven (''svar''), the celestial light (''jyotis''), occurs. The word ''[[नाक|nāka]]'' is explained in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx7_ve1_1530> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], x. 1, 18;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 4, 1, 24;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 14;<br> and ''cf.'' Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 10, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 9;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 50, 56, 57.</ref> as derived from ''na,'' ‘not,’ and ''aka,'' ‘pain,’ because those who go there are free from sorrow.

नाक
<u>'''2. Nāka'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1531> iii. 13, 5.</ref> Presumably he is identical with [[नाक|Nāka]] [[मौद्गल्य|Maudgalya]] (‘descendant of Mudgala’), who is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_1531> xii. 5, 2, 1.</ref> the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_1531> vi. 4, 4.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_1531> i. 9, 1.</ref> 

नाक्र
<u>'''Nākra'''</u> is the name of an aquatic animal included among the victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or ‘horse sacrifice,’ in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1532> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 13, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 35.</ref> Perhaps the animal meant is the crocodile, which later is called Nakra.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1532> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 96, following one version given by Mahīdhara on Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 21, n. 4.</ref>

नाग
<u>'''Nāga'''</u> appears once in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1533> xi. 2, 7, 12.</ref> in the form ''[[महानाग|mahānāga]],'' where ‘great snake’ or ‘great elephant’ may be meant. In the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_1533> i. 3, 24.</ref> and in a citation found in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1533> viii. 22.</ref> the sense of ‘elephant’ is clearly intended. In the Sūtras<ref name=fx4_ve1_1533> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 1. ''Cf.'' Winternitz, ''Sarpabali,'' 43;<br> Mac. donell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 153.</ref> the mythic [[नाग|Nāga]] already occurs.

नाग्न-जित
<u>'''Nāgna-jita,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[नग्नजित्|Nagnajit]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''Svarjit''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 1, 4, 10).<br>==Foot Notes==

नाचिकेत
<u>'''Nāciketa,'''</u> ‘connected with '''[[नचिकेतस्|Naciketas]],'''’ is the title of a narrative (''upākhyāna'') in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1535> iii. 16.</ref> The word is also applied as an epithet to a special fire in that [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1535> i. 18;<br> ii. 10.</ref> and in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_1535> i. 22, 11;<br> 26, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 386. The native lexicographers give Nāchiketa and Nāciketu as synonyms of fire generally.</ref>

नाड-पित्
<u>'''Nāḍa-pit'''</u> occurs in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1536> xiii. 5, 4, 13.</ref> as the birthplace of '''[[भरत|Bharata]].''' The word may, however, be read as Nāḍa-pitī, the name of Bharata's mother,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1536> Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 6, n. 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Leumann, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 81.</ref> but this is less probable. 

नाडी
<u>'''1. Nāḍī'''</u> denotes a ‘vein’ or ‘artery’ in the human body in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1537> vi. 138, 4;<br> x. 7, 15. 16.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1537> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 10;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 4, 5, 2;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1, 21;<br> iv. 2, 3, etc.;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 6, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 19.</ref> a natural extension of the literal sense of ‘reed.’

नाडी
<u>'''2. Nāḍī'''</u> means a musical instrument, a ‘reed flute,’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1538> x. 135, 7.</ref> as well as the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1538> xxiii. 4;<br> xxxiv. 5.</ref> where in one passage it is mentioned along with the '''[[तूणव|Tūṇava]].'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1538> xxxiv. 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 329.</ref>

नाडी
<u>'''3. Nāḍī'''</u> in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_1539> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 8, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 12.</ref> seems to mean the box of the chariot wheel.

नाडीका
<u>'''Nāḍīkā'''</u> occurs once in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1540> v. 18, 8. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 229;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 251;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 432.</ref> where the sense seems clearly to be ‘wind-pipe,’ with a reference also to the ‘shaft of an arrow’ made of reed.

नाथ
<u>'''Nātha'''</u> in Vedic literature<ref name=fx1_ve1_1541> Av. iv. 20, 9;<br> ix. 2, 17;<br> xviii. 1, 13;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 4, 1. Also in Av. xiii. 2, 37, ''[[नाथ|nātha]]-kāma,'' ‘seeking help’;<br> xi, 1, 15, ''[[नाथ|nātha]]-vid,'' ‘finding help’;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 11, 23, ''[[नाथ|nātha]]-vindu,'' ‘procuring protection,’ as the name of a Sāman, or chant.</ref> appears only as a neuter meaning ‘protection,’ and is of rare occurrence.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1541> In the post-Vedic literature, on the other hand, the word is a masculine, meaning ‘protector,’ and is very common.</ref> Generally, too, very little appears in Vedic literature of practices such as those which produced Anglo-Saxon society or the Roman ''patronatus.''

नापित
<u>'''Nāpita,'''</u> ‘barber,’ is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1542> iii. 1, 2, 2.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1542> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vii. 2, 8. 13;<br> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 17, etc.</ref> But the older word is [[वप्तृ|Vaptṛ]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_1542> Rv. x. 142, 4.</ref> a derivative of  ''vap,'' ‘shave,’ with forms of which verb shaving is referred to as early as the Rigveda.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1542> x. 142, 4. ''Cf.'' i. 65, 4;<br> Av. vi. 68;<br> v 2, 17, etc.</ref> The dead were shaved before burial.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1542> Av. v. 19, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 266;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 265.</ref>

नाभाक
<u>'''Nābhāka,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[नभाक|Nabhāka]],’ is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]], or seer, in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1543> viii. 41, 2;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], x. 5.</ref> The Anukramaṇī (Index) ascribes three or four hymns of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1543> viii. 39-41, and doubtfully 42.</ref> to him. According to Ludwig,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1543> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 107.</ref> the man was an [[आङ्गिरस|Āṅgirasa]],<ref name=fx4_ve1_1543> viii. 40, 12.</ref> not a [[कण्व|Kaṇva]].

नाभा-नेदिष्ठ
<u>'''Nābhā-nediṣṭha'''</u> (‘nearest in descent’) '''[[मानव|Mānava]]''' (‘descendant of Manu’) is famous in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve1_1544> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 1. 9. 4-6;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 14. ''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 191 ''et seq.''</ref> for the way in which he was treated when his father '''Manu''' divided his property among his sons, or they divided it: [[नाभानेदिष्ठ|Nābhānediṣṭha]] was left out, but was solaced by obtaining, through his father's advice, cows from the Aṅgirases, a feat which is regarded in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1544> xvi. 11. 28-30.</ref> as on a level with the exploits of other seers who celebrated their patrons in hymns, and as giving rise to the hymn, Rigveda x. 62. Nābhānediṣṭha's hymn is repeatedly mentioned in the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1544> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxviii. 4, merely refers to him as connected with the Aṅgirases. See also ''ibid.,'' xxx. 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 30. 31;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xx. 9, 4.</ref> but beyond its authorship nothing is recorded of him. In the Saṃhitā<ref name=fx4_ve1_1544> x. 61, 18.</ref> itself he seems to be spoken of as a poet in one passage, which is, however, of quite uncertain meaning.<br><br>[[नाभानेदिष्ठ|Nābhānediṣṭha]] is etymologically connected in all probability with Nabānazdiṣta in the Avesta, which refers to the Fravaṣi of the paoiryō-ṭkaēsha and the Fravaṣi of the Nabānazdiṣta. Lassen<ref name=fx5_ve1_1544> ''Indische Alterthumskunde,'' 1, 520, and ''Addenda,'' p. lxxvii.</ref> saw in the legend a reminiscence of an Indo-Iranian split; but Roth<ref name=fx6_ve1_1544> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 6, 243 ''et seq.''</ref> showed conclusively that this was impossible, and that [[नाभानेदिष्ठ|Nābhānediṣṭha]] meant simply ‘nearest in birth,’ and  Weber<ref name=fx7_ve1_1544> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 40-50. ''Cf.'' also '''[[दाय|Dāya]].'''</ref> admits that the connexion of the words is not one of borrowing on either side, but that in the Avesta it has kept its original sense of ‘nearest relation,’ while in the Rigveda it has become a proper name.

नाभि
<u>'''1. Nābhi'''</u> develops from the literal sense of ‘navel’ the figurative meaning of ‘relationship,’<ref name=fx1_ve1_1545> i. 105, 9;<br> 164, 33;<br> ii. 3, 9;<br> 40, 4, etc.;<br> Av. xii. 1, 40;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 8;<br> xi. 12;<br> xx. 1, etc.</ref> or, concretely, ‘relation.’<ref name=fx2_ve1_1545> Rv. i. 163, 12;<br> vi. 47, 28;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 42-44. 50, etc.</ref>

नाभि
<u>'''2. Nābhi,'''</u> ‘nave’ of a chariot wheel, is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1546> v. 43, 8;<br> vi. 39, 4;<br> viii. 41, 6.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1546> Av. iii. 30, 6;<br> x. 8, 34;<br> xi. 7, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 4;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 5, 11;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vii. 15, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 4;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 8.</ref> See also '''[[रथ|Ratha]],''' and ''cf.'' '''[[नभ्य|Nabhya]].'''

नाम-धेय
<u>'''Nāma-dheya,'''</u> ‘name,’ is found in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1547> x. 71, 1.</ref> and often in the later language.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1547> Av. vii. 109, 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 9, 3;<br> iii. 3, 4, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 1, 6, 1;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 3, 11;<br> vi. 4, 25;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 2, etc.</ref> See '''[[नामन्|Nāman]].'''

नामन्
<u>'''Nāman,'''</u> ‘name,’ is a common word from the Rigveda onwards. The [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] Sūtras<ref name=fx1_ve1_1548> Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 316 ''et seq.;<br>'' Hillebrandt, ''Rituallitteratur,'' 46, 47;<br> Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 152.</ref> give elaborate rules for the formation of the names of children, but more important is the distinction between the secret (''guhya'') and the ordinary name, though the rules as to the secret name are not at all consistent. The secret name is already recognized in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1548> ''Cf.'' x. 55, 2;<br> 71, 1, as explained in [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 3, 3.</ref> and is referred to in the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1548> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 1, 3, 9 (the name is given to a child at birth);<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 25.</ref> one secret name, that of Arjuna for Indra, being given in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_1548> ii. 1, 2, 11;<br> v. 4, 3, 7;<br> Weber, 2, 317, n. 3.</ref> It is to be noted that the rule as to giving the  designation of a [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] (lunar asterism) as the secret name or otherwise is not illustrated by a single recorded name of a teacher in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1548> Weber, 2, 318, 319. See '''Aṣāḍha, [[रौहिण|Rauhiṇa]], [[रौहिणायन|Rauhiṇāyana]].'''</ref><br><br>The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx6_ve1_1548> iii. 6, 2, 24;<br> v. 3, 3, 14;<br> ix. 4, 3, 3, which directs that the name should be derived from a feast performed by the person in question. See also [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxvi. 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 17.</ref> several times mentions the adoption of a second name with a view to securing success, and also refers to the adoption of another name for purposes of distinction.<ref name=fx7_ve1_1548> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 4, 4. ''Cf.'' vi. 1, 3, 9.</ref><br><br>In actual practice two names are usually found in the Brāhmaṇas, the second being a patronymic or a metronymic, as in '''[[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]] [[औशिज|Auśija]]'''<ref name=fx8_ve1_1548> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 11, 17.</ref> (if the story of the slave woman Uśij as his mother is correct), or '''[[बृहद्उक्थ|Bṛhaduktha]] Vāmneya,'''<ref name=fx9_ve1_1548> ''Ibid.,'' xiv. 9, 38.</ref> ‘son of Vāmnī,’ though the relationship may, of course, be not direct parentage, but more remote descent.<ref name=fx10_ve1_1548> Pargiter, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1910, 14;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 55, n. 2.</ref> Three names are less common--for example, '''[[कूशाम्ब स्वायव लातव्य|Kūśāmba <a class="pada_vei" href="स्वायव">Svāyava]] Lātavya»,'''<ref name=fx11_ve1_1548> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 6, 8.</ref> ‘son of Svāyu, of the [[लातव्य|Lātavya]] (son of Latu) family,’ or '''[[देवतरस् श्यावसायन काश्यप|Devataras <a class="pada_vei" href="श्यावसायन">Śyāvasāyana]] Kāśyapa»,'''<ref name=fx12_ve1_1548> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 40, 2.</ref> where the patronymic and the [[गोत्र|Gotra]] name are both found. In other cases the names probably have a local reference--''e.g.,'' '''[[कौशाम्बेय|Kauśāmbeya]]''' and '''[[गाङ्ग्य|Gāṅgya]].''' Frequently the patronymic only is given, as '''[[भार्गव|Bhārgava]], [[मौद्गल्य|Maudgalya]],''' etc., or two patronymics are used. The simple name is often used for the patronymic--''e.g.,'' '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]].'''<ref name=fx13_ve1_1548> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 1, 2, 13;<br> Hopkins, ''Religions of India,'' 201, n. 2.</ref> In a few cases the name of the wife is formed from the husband's name,<ref name=fx14_ve1_1548> ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 135.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 316-320;<br> Hopkins, ''loc. cit.''</ref> as '''Uśīnarāṇī, [[पुरुकुत्सानी|Purukutsānī]], Mudgalānī.'''

नाम्ब
<u>'''Nāmba'''</u> is the name of a kind of grain mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1549> v. 3, 3, 8.</ref> [[आम्ब|Āmba]] is the form of the word in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_1549> i. 8, 10, 1.</ref> and the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1549> xv. 15.</ref> 

नाय
<u>'''Nāya'''</u> in two passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1550> vi. 24, 10;<br> 46, 11.</ref> is, according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, probably a proper name. Sāyaṇa takes the word to mean ‘leader,’ while Pischel<ref name=fx2_ve1_1550> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 41. For other explanations, see Oldenberg, ''ṚgvedaNoten,'' 1, 123, 370.</ref> considers it a gerund with passive sense.

नारद
<u>'''Nārada'''</u> is the name of a mythical seer mentioned several times in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1551> v. 19, 9;<br> xii. 4, 16. 24. 41.</ref> In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] he appears in conjunction with '''[[पर्वत|Parvata]]''' as priest of '''Hariścandra,'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1551> vii. 13. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 17.</ref> as teaching '''[[सोमक साहदेव्य|Somaka Sāhadevya]],'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1551> vii. 34.</ref> and as anointing '''Āmbāṣṭhya''' and '''Yudhāṃśrauṣṭi.'''<ref name=fx4_ve1_1551> viii. 21.</ref> In the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx5_ve1_1551> i. 5, 8.</ref> he is mentioned as a teacher, and in the Sāmavidhāna [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx6_ve1_1551> iii. 9 (the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]], or ‘list of teachers,’ at the end).</ref> as a pupil of [[बृहस्पति|Bṛhaspati]]. In the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx7_ve1_1551> vii. 1, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 204, n.</ref> he is coupled with [[सनत्कुमार|Sanatkumāra]].

नाराशंसी
<u>'''Nārāśaṃsī'''</u> (scil. Ṛc), ‘(verse) celebrating men,’ is mentioned as early as the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1552> x. 85, 6.</ref> and is distinguished from '''[[गाथा|Gāthā]]''' in a number of passages in the later literature.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1552> Av. xv. 6, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 11, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 32;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxx. 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 10, etc.;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 78. The passage, Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 6, 8, is uncertain. See Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 98, n. 5.</ref> The [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1552> xiv. 5;<br> Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 98.</ref> while distinguishing the two, asserts that both are false (''anṛtam''). It is hardly probable that the two were absolutely distinct, for the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_1552> i. 3, 2, 6.</ref> has the phrase ‘a [[गाथा|Gāthā]] celebrating men’ (''[[नाराशंसी|nārāśaṃsī]]''). What such verses were may be seen from the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx5_ve1_1552> xvi. 11, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 10 ''et seq.''</ref> which enumerates the ''Nārāśaṃsāni'' at the Puruṣamedha, or ‘human  sacrifice.’ They may legitimately be reckoned as a source of the epic.<ref name=fx6_ve1_1552> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 264, n. Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 100 (''cf. Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 688, 689), lays stress rather on their character as mere eulogies of donors, and that, no doubt, was one of their sides;<br> but the other elements may have been more prominent in reality than the priestly tradition shows.</ref><br><br>The term [[नाराशंसी|Nārāśaṃsī]] is restricted in some passages<ref name=fx7_ve1_1552> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 32;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxx. 5. Possibly, in the other passages mentioned in note 2, the reference may be to the Atharvaveda verses, but this is not at all likely.</ref> to a particular group of three verses of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx8_ve1_1552> xx. 127, 1-3 = [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 14, 1-3. ''Cf.'' Scheftelowitz, ''Die Apokryphen des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 155.</ref> but Oldenberg<ref name=fx9_ve1_1552> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 238.</ref> must be right in holding that the restricted sense is not to be read into the Rigveda.<ref name=fx10_ve1_1552> x. 85, 6.</ref> Not even in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx11_ve1_1552> vii. 5, 11, 2.</ref> is the technical sense certain, and the Bṛhaddevatā<ref name=fx12_ve1_1552> iii. 154.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Episches im Vedischen Ritual,'' 4 ''et seq.''</ref> gives the word a general application.

नारी
<u>'''Nārī,'''</u> ‘woman,’ occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1553> vii. 20, 5;<br> 55, 8;<br> viii. 77, 8;<br> x. 18, 7;<br> 86, 10. 11.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1553> Av. xiv. 2, 13;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 36;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 34.</ref> The word seems in the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_1553> i. 73, 3 (''pati-juṣṭā,'' ‘dear to her husband’);<br> vii. 20. 5;<br> x. 18, 7 (''avidhavāḥ supatnīḥ,'' ‘not widowed, with noble husbands’), etc.</ref> to have a distinct reference to a woman as a wife, because it occurs in several passages with distinct reference to matrimonial relations,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1553/> and in the later Vedic literature, where it is not common, it sometimes<ref name=fx4_ve1_1553> [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 28.</ref> has that sense. Delbrück,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1553> ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 417, 439.</ref> however, thinks that it does not indicate marital relations, but merely the woman as the sexual complement of the man.

नार्मर
<u>'''Nārmara'''</u> occurs once in a corrupt verse of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1554> ii. 13, 8.</ref> Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_1554> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 152.</ref> regards the word as the proper name of the prince of a fort, '''[[ऊर्जयन्ती|Ūrjayantī]],''' but Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_1554> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> as that of a demon. 

नार्मिणी
<u>'''Nārmiṇī'''</u> is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1555> i. 149, 3.</ref> as an epithet of '''Pur,''' ‘fort’: it must apparently either be a proper name of the fort,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1555> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 204.</ref> or mean ‘belonging to Narmin or Narmiṇa,’ some prince.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1555> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' Possibly the expression may consist of two words--''na,'' ‘not’ or ‘like,’ and ''armiṇī,'' whatever that may mean. See Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 148;<br> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 46, 177.</ref>

नार्य
<u>'''Nārya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[नर्य|Narya]],’''' is the name of a generous donor in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1556> viii. 24, 29. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 161, 162.</ref>

नार्षद
<u>'''Nārṣada,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[नृषद्|Nṛṣad]],’ is the patronymic of [[कण्व|Kaṇva]] (''i.e.,'' a descendant of [[कण्व|Kaṇva]]) in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1557> iv. 19, 2.</ref> and in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1557> x. 31, 11.</ref> where probably the same man is referred to in another passage<ref name=fx3_ve1_1557> i. 117, 8.</ref> as a protégé of the Aśvins, and perhaps as the husband of '''Ruśatī.''' But in a third passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_1557> x. 61, 13.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 108, 150;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 397.</ref> the name seems applied to a demon, though this is not certain.

नाव-प्रभ्रंशन
<u>'''Nāva-prabhraṃśana,'''</u> the ‘sliding down of the ship,’ is read in Whitney and Roth's text of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1558> xix. 39, 8, where the reading ''nāvaprabhráṃśana'' is a conjectural emendātion, the manuscripts of the Saṃhitā text all having two accents, ''nāvaprabhráṃśana'' (one of them reading ''nāvaḥ-'').</ref> and has been connected by Weber<ref name=fx2_ve1_1558> ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 11.</ref> and others<ref name=fx3_ve1_1558> ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 198;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 218, n.;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 30.</ref> with [[मनोर् अवसर्पण|Manor Avasarpaṇa]], the name in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_1558> i. 8, 1, 6.</ref> of the northern mountain on which Manu's ship settled on the subsidence of the deluge. But both Bloomfield<ref name=fx5_ve1_1558> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 679.</ref> and Whitney<ref name=fx6_ve1_1558> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 961.</ref> point out that this interpretation is highly improbable, and this view is accepted by  Macdonell.<ref name=fx7_ve1_1558> ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1907, 1107, where his acceptance of Weber's interpretation in his ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 144, is withdrawn.</ref> The expression is analyzed as ''na ava-prabhraṃśana'' by the Pada text and the commentator alike, and is never found elsewhere with reference to the descent of a boat or ship.<ref name=fx8_ve1_1558> The word ''nau,'' ship, never occurs as the first member of a compound in the form of ''nāva,'' while ''pra-bhraṃś,'' ‘fall down,’ is never used of the gliding down of a boat, and would be inappropriately applied in that sense.</ref>

नावा
<u>'''Nāvā,'''</u> ‘ship,’ occurs once in the Rigveda (i. 97, 8). See '''Nau.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

नावाज
<u>'''Nāvāja'''</u> (‘ship-propeller’), a ‘boatman,’ is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ii. 3, 3, 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

नाव्या
<u>'''Nāvyā'''</u> is found several times in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1561> i. 33, 11;<br> 80, 8;<br> 121, 13.</ref> and the later literature<ref name=fx2_ve1_1561> Av. viii. 5, 9;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiii. 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 5, 4, 14, etc.</ref> in the sense of a ‘navigable stream.’

नाहुष
<u>'''Nāhuṣa,'''</u> like '''[[नहुस्|Nahus]],''' means, according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, in some passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1562> i. 100, 16;<br> v. 73, 3;<br> vi. 22, 10;<br> viii. 6, 24.</ref> ‘neighbouring’ as an adjective, and once<ref name=fx2_ve1_1562> viii. 95, 2.</ref> as a substantive ‘neighbour.’ If, on the other hand, [[नहुस्|Nahus]] is taken as a proper name, then [[नाहुष|Nāhuṣa]] no doubt denotes ‘belonging to the [[नहुस्|Nahus]] people,’ and, as a substantive, ‘King of the [[नहुस्|Nahus]].’

निकोथक भाय-जात्य
<u>'''Nikothaka Bhāya-jātya'''</u> (‘descendant of Bhayajāta’) is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1563> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373. ''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 444.</ref> as a pupil of '''Pratithi.'''

निगद पार्ण-वल्कि
<u>'''Nigada Pārṇa-valki'''</u> (‘descendant of Parṇavalka’) is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1564> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372. ''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 443.</ref> as a pupil of Giriśarman. 

नि-गुत्
<u>'''Ni-gut'''</u> occurs in two passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1565> ix. 97, 53, 54;<br> x. 128, 6.</ref> where Sāyaṇa takes it to mean ‘enemy,’ a possible interpretation. Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_1565> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 164.</ref> suggests that non-Āryan foes are meant.

निगुस्थ
<u>'''Nigustha'''</u> is a term of unknown meaning applied in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xvi. 29, 6) to the peoples of [[काशि|Kāśi]], [[विदेह|Videha]], and [[कोसल|Kosala]].<br>==Foot Notes==

नि-तत्नी
<u>'''1. Ni-tatnī,'''</u> ‘striking downwards,’ occurs in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1567> vi. 136;<br> probably 137 also refers to this plant. ''Cf.'' [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxxi. 28, with Caland's note in his translation;<br> Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 61;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 536, 537;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 383.</ref> as the name of an unknown plant which was used as a means of restoring the hair.

नि-तत्नी
<u>'''2. Ni-tatnī'''</u> is the name of one of the seven '''[[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]]''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 1, 4, 1). See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

नि-तान मारुत
<u>'''Ni-tāna Māruta'''</u> is the name of a man in the '''[[काठक|Kāṭhaka]]''' Saṃhitā (xxv. 10).<br>==Foot Notes==

नि-दाघ
<u>'''Ni-dāgha'''</u> (‘burning down’), ‘summer,’ is the name of one of the seasons in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 8, 1, 4). See '''[[नैदाघ|Naidāgha]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

नि-दान
<u>'''Ni-dāna'''</u> is the name of a [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], which is referred to in the Bṛhaddevatā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1571> v. 23, with Macdonell's note.</ref> apparently as containing a quotation from the [[भाल्लवि|Bhāllavi]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. The quotation cannot be verified in the existing text of the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1571> Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 65.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 44;<br> Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 111, etc.</ref> 

नि-धा
<u>'''Ni-dhā,'''</u> ‘net,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1572> ix. 83, 4;<br> x. 73, 11;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iv. 2.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1572> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 19.</ref>

नि-धि
<u>'''Ni-dhi'''</u> means primarily ‘(place of) deposit,’ ‘store,’<ref name=fx1_ve1_1573> Rv. i. 183, 4;<br> v. 43, 8;<br> vii. 67, 7;<br> 69, 3, etc.</ref> and then ‘treasure’ generally.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1573> Rv. ii. 24, 6;<br> viii. 29, 6;<br> x. 68, 6;<br> Av. x. 7, 23, etc.</ref> In the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1573> vii. 1, 2. 4;<br> 2, 1;<br> 7, 1. The St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' and Bo7hṭlingk in his edition, take ''daivo nidhiḥ'' as one expression. See '''[[दैव|Daiva]].''' Sāyaṇa takes each as a separate entity, and renders [[निधि|Nidhi]] as ''mahākālādinidhiśāstram,'' presumably meaning some sort of chronology.<br><br>''Cf.'' for [[निधि|Nidhi]] as ‘treasure,’ Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 103, 104.</ref> [[निधि|Nidhi]] denotes some sort of science.

नि-नाह्य
<u>'''Ni-nāhya'''</u> denotes in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 9, 2, 8) a ‘water jar,’ so called, according to the commentator, because it was buried in the ground.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1574> As meaning etymologically ‘to be fastened or fixed down.’</ref> Eggeling<ref name=fx2_ve1_1574> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 223, n. 4.</ref> explains it as ‘a vessel or cistern dug into the ground for keeping water cool.’

निन्दिताश्व
<u>'''Ninditāśva'''</u> (‘possessing contemptible steeds’) is the name of a patron in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1575> viii. 1, 30.</ref> The name may suggest connexion with Iran, but such a reference is not at all necessary.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1575> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 90. ''Cf.'' Ludwing, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 159.</ref> Sāyaṇa ingeniously turns the name--probably a nickname-into a compliment by rendering it ‘one who puts to shame the horses of his rivals.’

नि-पाद
<u>'''Ni-pāda'''</u> in the Rigveda (v. 83, 7) denotes ‘low ground,’. ‘valley,’ as opposed to ‘hill’ (''udvat''). ''Cf.'' '''[[निवत्|Nivat]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

नि-म्रुच्
<u>'''Ni-mruc,'''</u> ‘sunset,’ is repeatedly mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1577> i. 151, 5;<br> 161, 10;<br> viii. 27, 19;<br> x. 151, 5.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1577> Av. xiii. 3, 21;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 5, 10, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 10;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 5, 2, etc.</ref> as a division of time. 

निर्-अष्ट
<u>'''Nir-aṣṭa,'''</u> ‘castrated,’ is found in some of the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_1578> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 9, 1;<br> 17, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 4. 9.</ref> as applied to oxen, and in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1578> xiii. 4, 2, 5.</ref> to horses.

निर्-आल
<u>'''Nir-āla'''</u> occurs once in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1579> vi. 16, 3.</ref> where Sāyaṇa regards it as the name of a disease. Bloomfield,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1579> ''Hymns of the Atharvavéda,'' 466.</ref> with the Padapāṭha, explains it as two words, understanding ''nir'' as an elliptical imperative, ‘(go) out,’ with the vocative ''[[आल|āla]],'' a kind of weed. Whitney<ref name=fx3_ve1_1579> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 292.</ref> at first took ''[[आल|āla]]'' to be a verbal form, but finally came to the conclusion that the expression is one word, ''[[निर्आल|nirāla]],'' of unknown sense.

निरुक्त
<u>'''Nirukta,'''</u> ‘explanation’ of a word or passage, is found in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (viii. 3, 3), but does not appear as the name of a work before the later Upaniṣads. It is, however, probable that Yāska's [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] is not later than the rise of Buddhism. ''Cf.'' '''[[निर्वचन|Nirvacana]].'''<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 13, 17; 3, 260 ''et seq.; Indian Literature,'' 25, 26, 41, 42, etc.; Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 269, 270; Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 24, 25; Roth, ''[[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],'' xv. ''et seq.''<br>==Foot Notes==

निर्-यास
<u>'''Nir-yāsa'''</u> denotes the ‘exudation’ of trees. In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (ii. 1, 5, 4) it is tabooed as food because of its red colour.<br>==Foot Notes==

निर्-वचन
<u>'''Nir-vacana'''</u> in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx1_ve1_1582> i. 6, 3.</ref> and the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1582> ii. 1. ''Cf. a-nirvacanam,'' ‘not serving as an explanation,’ ''ibid.,'' vii. 24.</ref> means ‘explanation,’ especially etymological. ''Cf.'' '''[[निरुक्त|Nirukta]].'''

नि-वत्
<u>'''Ni-vat'''</u> denotes ‘valley’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1583> i. 161, 11;<br> iii. 2, 10;<br> vii. 50, 4;<br> x. 127, 2;<br> 142, 4.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1583> Av. vi. 22, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 4;<br> 4, etc.</ref> 

निवान्य-वत्सा
<u>'''Nivānya-vatsā'''</u> and '''Nivānyā''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1584> xii. 5, 1, 4.</ref> denotes a ‘cow with a calf to which she has to be won over,’ that is, with a calf substituted for one of her own which has died. Nivānyā<ref name=fx2_ve1_1584> ii. 6, 1, 6.</ref> is a contracted form of the compound term. Similar expressions are ''abhivānya-vatsā,''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1584> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 2.</ref> ''abhivānyā,''<ref name=fx4_ve1_1584> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 8, 4.</ref> ''vānyā,''<ref name=fx5_ve1_1584> ''Ibid.,'' ii. 6, 16, 2.</ref> and ''apivānya-vatsā.''<ref name=fx6_ve1_1584> [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], lxxxii. 22.<br><br>''Cf.'' Lanman in Whitney's Translation of the Atharvaveda, 880.</ref>

नि-विद्
<u>'''Ni-vid'''</u> denotes a brief invocation of the deity that is invited in a liturgy in honour of the god. The Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve1_1585> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 33. 34;<br> iii. 10. 11;<br> vi. 33. 35;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 9, 3, 28;<br> xiii. 5, 1. 9, etc.;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 5, 2;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, i. 3, etc.</ref> repeatedly mention Nivids as inserted in the Śastras (recitations), and the '''Khilas''' of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1585> See Scheftelowitz, ''Die Apokryphen des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 137-143.</ref> preserve among them a set of Nivids. But it is doubtful<ref name=fx3_ve1_1585> The antiquity of the Nivids was asserted by Haug, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],'' 1, 26 ''et seq.,'' and often since, ''e.g.,'' by Tilak, ''Orion,'' 206;<br> Scheftelowitz, ''op. cit.,'' 3. It is shown to be most improbable by Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 265, 355, and Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 242 ''et seq.;<br> Go7ttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen,'' 1907, 232, 233.</ref> whether the habit of using such brief formulas--the [[निविद्|Nivid]] is usually not more than a Pada or quarter-verse in length--is known to the Rigveda, though it has been seen even there,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1585> i. 86, 4;<br> Bezzenberger's ''Beiträge,'' 9, 192. So Oldenberg, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 46, 119, 122, takes Rv. i. 96, 2, to refer to the Nivids in the technical sense, but not to the Nivids as preserved.</ref> and the word [[निविद्|Nivid]] is several times found in that Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1585> i. 89, 3;<br> 96, 2;<br> 175, 6;<br> ii. 36, 6;<br> iv. 18, 7;<br> vi. 67, 10.</ref> but hardly in the technical sense of the Brāhmaṇas. In the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx6_ve1_1585> Av. v. 26, 4;<br> xi. 7, 19;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix, 25, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Rituallitteratur,'' 102;<br> Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 387, n. 2;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 241.</ref> the technical sense is common.

निविद्-धान
<u>'''Nivid-dhāna,'''</u> ‘containing a [[निविद्|Nivid]],’ is found several times as an epithet of a hymn or verse in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1586> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 17;<br> Kauṣīaki [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxi. 6;<br> xxiv. 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 1, 12;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 2, 2;<br> 5, 3.</ref> 

नि-वेशन
<u>'''Ni-veśana,'''</u> ‘dwelling,’ occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1587> iv. 19, 9;<br> vii. 19, 5.</ref> and the Sūtras. In the latter<ref name=fx2_ve1_1587> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 6, etc.</ref> the word is sometimes contrasted with '''[[गृह|Gṛha]]''' as the resting-place of animals.

नि-षङ्गथि
<u>'''Ni-ṣaṅgathi'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_1588> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 11;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 2.</ref> or '''Niṣaṅga-dhi'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1588> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 10.</ref> is found in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās. If the second form of the word is correct, the sense may be ‘sheath of a sword’ (''niṣaṅga''), as it is taken by the St. Petersburg Dictionary, but probably the first form is the correct one, the word then having the same meaning as '''[[निषङ्गिन्|Niṣaṅgin]].'''

नि-षङ्गिन्
<u>'''Ni-ṣaṅgin'''</u> is found three times in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1589> iii. 30, 15;<br> v. 57, 2;<br> x. 103, 3.</ref> where, owing to its following in one passage<ref name=fx2_ve1_1589> v. 57, 2.</ref> the words ''sudhanvāna iṣumanto,'' ‘having good bows and arrows,’ the sense of ''niṣaṅginaḥ'' as ‘having quivers’ seems quite certain. In the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve1_1589> xvi. 20. ''Cf.'' Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xx, 2, 11, with the commentator.</ref> it is taken by the commentator Mahīdhara to mean ‘having a sword,’ a sense which is quite possible both there and in the other passages<ref name=fx4_ve1_1589> [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]], ii. 1199;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 12;<br> xxxvii. 11;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 3, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 2, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 274.</ref> where it occurs. But the word far more probably means ‘having a quiver,’ for the bow was the Vedic weapon, not the sword ('''Asi''').

नि-षाद
<u>'''Ni-ṣāda'''</u> is found in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1590> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 4, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 13;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 27;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 11;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 6, 8, etc.</ref> The word seems to denote not so much a particular tribe, but to be the general term for the non-Āryan tribes who were not under Āryan control, as the Śūdras were, for [[औपमन्यव|Aupamanyava]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1590> In [[यास्क|Yāska]], [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 8.</ref> took the five peoples (''pañca janāḥ'') to be the four castes (''catvāro  varṇāḥ'') and the Niṣādas, and the commentator Mahīdhara explains the word where it occurs in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve1_1590> xvi. 27. ''Cf.'' xxx. 8.</ref> as meaning a Bhilla, or Bhīl. A village of Niṣādas is mentioned in the Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx4_ve1_1590> viii. 2, 8.</ref> and a [[निषाद|Niṣāda]] '''[[स्थपति|Sthapati]],''' a leader of some kind, is referred to in the Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_1590> i. 1, 12;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 13.</ref> and in a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] cited by the scholiast on that passage. Weber<ref name=fx6_ve1_1590> ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 340. ''Cf.'' 10, 13, 16.</ref> thinks that the Niṣādas were the settled aborigines (form ''ni,'' ‘down,’ and ''sad,'' ‘settle’), a view supported by the fact that the ritual of the Viśvajit sacrifice<ref name=fx7_ve1_1590> See [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 15;<br> Lāṭyāyana, ''loc. cit.;<br>'' [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> requires a temporary residence with Niṣādas; for the Niṣādas who would permit an Āryan to reside temporarily amongst them must have been partially amenable to Āryan influence. But the name might easily be applied to the whole body of aborigines outside the Āryan organization. Von Schroeder<ref name=fx8_ve1_1590> ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 366. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 39, 119. In the later system (Manu, x. 8) the [[निषाद|Niṣāda]] is the offspring of a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] and of a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] woman, while the Bṛhatsaṃhitā of Varāhamihira (xiv. 10) recognizes a kingdom (''[[राष्ट्र|rāṣṭra]]'') of Niṣādas in the south-east of [[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]]. In the Pāli texts (Fick, ''Die sociale Gliederung,'' 12, 160, 206 ''et seq.'') they are wild hunters and fishers. ''Cf.'' also Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 301, 303, 366, n. 164, 403, 481.</ref> thinks that the Niṣādas were most probably identical with the Nysæans, who, according to the Greek account, sent an embassy to Alexander when he was in the territory of the Aśvakas, but this identification is doubtful.

निष्क
<u>'''Niṣka'''</u> is frequently found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1591> ii. 33, 10;<br> viii. 47, 15. etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1591> Av. v. 14, 3;<br> vii. 99, 1;<br> xx. 131. 8;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 2, 1. 2;<br> v. 13, 2;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 36, 7. 8;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 1, 7. 11, etc.</ref> denoting a gold ornament worn on the neck, as is shown by the two epithets ''[[निष्क|niṣka]]-kaṇṭha''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1591> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 22.</ref> and ''[[निष्क|niṣka]]-grīva,''<ref name=fx4_ve1_1591> Rv. v. 19, 3;<br> Av. v. 17, 14.</ref> ‘having a gold ornament on the neck.’ A [[निष्क|Niṣka]] of silver is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx5_ve1_1591> xvii. 1, 14, as worn by the [[व्रात्य|Vrātya]] ''Cf.'' Av. xv. 3.</ref> As early as the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve1_1591> i. 126, 2.</ref> traces are seen of the  use of Niṣkas as a sort of currency, for a singer celebrates the receipt of a hundred Niṣkas and a hundred steeds: he could hardly require the Niṣkas merely for purposes of personal adornment. Later the use of Niṣkas as currency is quite clear.<ref name=fx7_ve1_1591> Av. xx. 127, 3;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 9, 20, etc. In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 4, 1, 1. 8;<br> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 6;<br> the sense of ‘coin’ is seen by Eggeling. ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 50, 51, and by Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 185.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 51, 259, 263;<br> Geldner, ''op. cit.,'' 1, 268, n. 2;<br> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 40, 127.</ref> ''Cf.'' also '''[[कृष्णल|Kṛṣṇala]].'''

निष्किरीय
<u>'''Niṣkirīya'''</u> is the name of a school of priests who are mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1592> xii. 5, 14. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 58.</ref> as holding a Sattra, or ‘sacrificial session.’

निष्ट्य
<u>'''Niṣṭya'''</u> means in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1593> vi. 75, 19;<br> viii. 1, 13;<br> x. 133, 5.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1593> Av. iii. 3, 6;<br> Vājasaneyi, v. 23;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 4, 17, etc.</ref> an outsider or stranger. Hence the constellation usually known as Svāti (see '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]]''') is named Niṣṭyā in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_1593> i. 5, 2, 2. 3;<br> iii. 1, 1, 13.<br><br>''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 215.</ref> because it occupies a position markedly away from the ecliptic.

निहाका
<u>'''Nihākā'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1594> x. 97, 13.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_1594> vii. 5, 11, 1 (following ''[[नीहार|nīhāra]]'').</ref> appears to denote some phenomenon of a storm, perhaps the ‘whirlwind.’

नीक्षण
<u>'''Nīkṣaṇa.'''</u> See '''[[नेक्षण|Nekṣaṇa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

नीच्य
<u>'''Nīcya'''</u> (‘living below’) is a designation of certain nations of the west. The Nīcyas are mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 14) as distinguished from the people of '''[[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]],''' and no doubt mean the inhabitants of the Indus and Panjab regions. <br>==Foot Notes==

नीथ
<u>'''Nītha'''</u> (‘leading’), neut., means musical ‘mode’ and then ‘hymn of praise.’<ref name=fx1_ve1_1597> Rv. iv. 3, 16;<br> vii. 26, 2;<br> x. 92, 3;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 38. ''Cf. nīthāvid'' of singers (''[[जरितृ|jaritṛ]]'') in Rv. iii. 12, 5.</ref> The feminine form Nīthā occurs once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1597> i. 104, 5. ''Cf.'' the epithet ''śata-[[नीथ|nītha]],'' i. 100, 12;<br> 179, 3;<br> x. 69, 7;<br> ''sahasranītha,'' iii. 60, 7;<br> ix. 85, 4;<br> 96, 18 (used of the poet's art, ''padavīḥ kavīnām'').<br><br>''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 241.</ref> meaning ‘artifice.’

नीनाह
<u>'''Nīnāha,'''</u> a word occurring once in the Atharvaveda (xix. 57, 4), seems to denote a ‘girdle’ or something similar, as derived from the verb ''nah,'' ‘fasten.’<br>==Foot Notes==

नीपातिथि
<u>'''Nīpātithi'''</u> occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1599> viii. 49, 9, where he appears as engaged in battle;<br> viii. 51, 1, where he seems to be a sacrificer. Either a king or a seer may be meant.</ref> as the name of a man to whom a hymn<ref name=fx2_ve1_1599> viii. 34. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 140;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 90.</ref> is ascribed by the Anukramaṇī (Index). A Sāman, or Chant, of his is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_1599> xiv. 10, 4.</ref>

नीलङ्गु
<u>'''Nīlaṅgu'''</u> is the name of a species of ‘worm’ in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_1600> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 11, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 11 (''v.l. nīlāṅgu'');<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 30. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98.</ref> in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or ‘horse sacrifice.’

नील-शीर्ष्णी
<u>'''Nīla-śīrṣṇī,'''</u> ‘black-headed,’ is the name of an unknown animal in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or ‘horse sacrifice,’ in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1601> v. 5, 15, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 99.</ref>

नीलागलसाल
<u>'''Nīlāgalasāla,'''</u> or, as the Paippalāda version reads, '''Nīlākalasālā,''' is the name, according to the commentator, of a graincreeper in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1602> vi. 16, 4. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 292, 293;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 466.</ref> 

नीवार
<u>'''Nīvāra,'''</u> ‘wild rice,’ is mentioned in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_1603> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 10;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 12.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1603> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, 4, 14;<br> 3, 3, 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 6, 7, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 240.</ref>

नीवि
<u>'''Nīvi'''</u> is the name of the ‘undergarment,’ probably a simple apron of cloth, worn by both men and women, but especially by the latter. It is mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1604> viii. 2, 16;<br> xiv. 2, 50. ''Cf. nīvibhārya,'' ‘to be borne in the apron,’ viii. 6, 20.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1604> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 1, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iv. 10;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 3, 6;<br> iii. 2, 1, 15, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 262;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 331.</ref>

नीहार
<u>'''Nīhāra,'''</u> ‘mist,’ occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1605> x. 82, 7.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1605> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 11, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxviii. 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 26;<br> xxv. 9;<br> Av. vi. 113, 2;<br> xviii. 3, 60;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 10, 7;<br> vi. 4, 1;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 19, 2, etc.</ref>

नृ
<u>'''Nṛ.'''</u> See '''Nara.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

नृति
<u>'''Nṛti'''</u> in one passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1607> vi. 18, 3.</ref> seems to mean a bag of skin. But though the Paippalāda recension has the same text, it is clear that we must read '''[[दृति|Dṛti]]''' with Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_1607> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> and Whitney.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1607> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 294. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 235;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 468.</ref> Ludwig<ref name=fx4_ve1_1607> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 514.</ref> renders the word ‘dancer,’ which makes no sense in the context.

नृतू
<u>'''Nṛtū'''</u> occurs once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1608> i. 92, 4 (where Uṣas, Goddess of Dawn, is compared to a dancer).</ref> denoting a female ‘dancer.’ In another passage<ref name=fx2_ve1_1608> x. 18, 3. ''Cf.'' 29, 2.</ref> [[नृति|Nṛti]] is found coupled with ''hāsa,'' ‘laughter,’ in the description of the funeral ritual; but though it is clear that a joyful celebration is meant (like the Irish ‘wake’ or the  old-fashioned feasting in Scotland after a funeral), it is difficult to be certain that actual dancing is here meant. Dancing is, however, often referred to in the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_1608> i. 10, 1;<br> 92, 4, etc. See Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 196 ''et seq.''</ref> and later. Nṛttagīta, ‘dance and song,’ are mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_1608> i. 42 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 235).</ref> as found in the sixth world. See also '''[[शैलूष|Śailūṣa]].'''

नृ-पति
<u>'''Nṛ-pati,'''</u> ‘lord of men,’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1609> ii. 1, 1. 7;<br> iv. 20, 1;<br> vii. 69, 1;<br> x. 44, 2. 3.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1609> Av. v. 18, 1. 15;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, vi. 3, 3;<br> x. 77, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘king’ or a man of the ruling class ('''[[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]''').

नृ-मेध
<u>'''Nṛ-medha,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_1610> Rv. x. 80, 3;<br> 132, 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 8, 3.</ref> '''[[नृ|Nṛ]]-medhas,'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1610> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 8, 21 ''et seq.''</ref> is the name of a protégé of Agni in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1610> x. 80, 3.</ref> where he also appears with '''Sumedhas''' in a hymn that Griffith<ref name=fx4_ve1_1610> x. 132;<br> Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 578, n.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 160;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 61.</ref> with justice declares to be unintelligible. In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1610/> he is an unsuccessful rival of '''[[परुच्छेप|Parucchepa]],''' and in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1610/> he is an [[आङ्गिरस|Āṅgirasa]] and a seer of Sāmans (Chants).

नृ-षद्
<u>'''Nṛ-ṣad,'''</u> ‘sitting among men,’ is the name of the father of '''[[कण्व|Kaṇva]]''' in the Rigveda (x. 31, 11). ''Cf.'' '''[[नार्षद|Nārṣada]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

नेक्षण
<u>'''Nekṣaṇa'''</u> occurs once in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1612> ix. 6, 17. ''Cf.'' [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 11;<br> lxxxvii. 12;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 540.</ref> where a ‘spit’ seems to be meant. In the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1612> i. 162, 13.</ref> [[नीक्षण|Nīkṣaṇa]] occurs, and must have the same sense; Oldenberg<ref name=fx3_ve1_1612> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 155.</ref> inclines to think that this word refers to the ‘inspection’ of food, to see if it is ready (as from ''ni-īkṣ,'' ‘look into’). 

नेमि
<u>'''Nemi'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1613> i. 32, 15;<br> 141, 9;<br> ii. 5, 3;<br> v. 13, 6;<br> vii. 32, 20;<br> viii. 46, 23;<br> 75, 5, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1613> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 2, 15;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 5, 15, etc.</ref> the ‘felly’ of a chariot wheel. It was required to be of good wood (''su-drū''),<ref name=fx3_ve1_1613> Rv. vii. 32, 20.</ref> and was bent into shape.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1613> Rv. viii. 75, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 248.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[रथ|Ratha]].'''

नेष्टृ
<u>'''Neṣṭṛ,'''</u> the name of one of the chief priests at the Soma sacrifice, occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1614> i. 15, 3;<br> ii. 5, 5, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1614> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 18, 1;<br> vi. 5, 8, 5. 6;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 3, 10, etc.;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 2, 1, etc.;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 15, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 250, 261, 527.</ref> See '''[[ऋत्व्इज्|Ṛtvij]].'''

नैचा-शाख
<u>'''Naicā-śākha'''</u> is found in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1615> vii. 53, 4.</ref> where Sāyaṇa renders it as ‘of low origin,’ but elsewhere<ref name=fx2_ve1_1615> See St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> he explains it as the name of a place. The former sense is accepted by Grassmann and Ludwig in their versions, and by Zimmer,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1615> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 31.</ref> but Hillebrandt<ref name=fx4_ve1_1615> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 14-18;<br> 2, 241245, where he opposes Bo7htlingk's view that it is a proper name.</ref> points out that the reference is rather to the ‘low-branched’ Soma plant. ''Cf.'' '''[[कीकट|Kīkaṭa]]''' and '''[[प्रमगन्द|Pramaganda]].'''

नैचु-दार
<u>'''Naicu-dāra'''</u> occurs in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1616> xxi. 4, 13. ''Cf.'' Anupada [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vi. 4.</ref> meaning ‘composed of the wood of the Nicudāra.’ What tree is meant by the latter name is unknown.

नैतन्धव
<u>'''Naitandhava'''</u> is mentioned as a place on the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1617> xxv. 13, 1.</ref> and the Sūtras.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1617> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 19, 13;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 29, 31;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxiv. 6, 23.</ref>

नै-दाघ
<u>'''Nai-dāgha'''</u> is the name of the ‘summer’ season in the later Saṃhitās and Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1618> Av. ix. 5, 31;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 4, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 1, 16, etc.;<br> ''naidāghīya,'' ‘belonging to the summer,’ [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxiii. 16, 8, etc.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[ऋतु|Ṛtu]]''' and '''[[निदाघ|Nidāgha]].''' 

नै-दान
<u>'''Nai-dāna'''</u> is a term applied in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1619> vi. 9;<br> vii. 12.</ref> to a class of Vedic interpreters. Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_1619> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' But ''of.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ''Erlāuterungen,'' 220, 221;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 2^2, 176.</ref> takes the Naidānas to be ‘etymologists,’ but Sieg<ref name=fx3_ve1_1619> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 29.</ref> thinks they are the same as the '''Aitihāsikas''' or ‘legendarists.’<ref name=fx4_ve1_1619> The word seems to mean ‘one concerned with the original form’ (''[[निदान|nidāna]]'').</ref>

नै-ध्रुवि
<u>'''Nai-dhruvi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Nidhruva,’ is the patronymic of '''[[कश्यप|Kaśyapa]]''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1620> vi. 4, 33 (Mādhyandina = vi. 5, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref>

नैमिशि
<u>'''Naimiśi'''</u> is the epithet of '''Śitibāhu [[ऐषकृत|Aiṣakṛta]]''' in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1621> i. 363 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 26, 192).</ref> It is probably to be taken as an indication that Śitibāhu came from the Naimiśa forest.

नैमिशीय
<u>'''Naimiśīya,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_1622> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 6, 4;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 363 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 26, 192).</ref> '''Naimiṣīya'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1622> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxvi. 5;<br> xxviii. 4;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 2, 13;<br> Naimiṣya, [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, x. 6 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 469). The cerebrals seems to be universal later.</ref> denotes the dwellers in the Naimiśa forest. They are mentioned in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_1622/> and the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1622/> being clearly of special sanctity. Hence in the Epic the Mahābhārata is said to have been recited to the [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]] dwelling in the Naimiṣa forest.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1622> Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 34, 45, 54, 68, 70, 185.</ref>

नैर्-उक्त
<u>'''Nair-ukta'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_1623> ‘One concerned with etymological explanation’ (''nir-ukta'').</ref> in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1623> i. 12;<br> vi. 11;<br> xi. 19. 29. 31;<br> xii. 10;<br> xiii. 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 26, 85;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 2, 39, n.;<br> Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffc des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 10-13;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 2^2, 165 ''et seq.''</ref> denotes a man who knows the true etymology of words, and explains their meaning accordingly. Yāska's [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] is the classic work of this school, and forms a commentary on an earlier [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], the so-called Naighaṇṭuka, a glossary consisting of five collections of Vedic words. 

नै-षाद
<u>'''Nai-ṣāda,'''</u> a ‘man of [[निषाद|Niṣāda]],’ is mentioned in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xxv. 15) and the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā (xxx. 8).<br>==Foot Notes==

नैषिध
<u>'''Naiṣidha'''</u> is the reading in the Śata atha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ii. 3, 2, 1. 2) of the epithet of '''[[नड|Naḍa]],''' a king of the south. The later form of the name is Naiṣadha; the St. Petersburg Dictionarv suggests that its original form was Naiḥṣidha.<br>==Foot Notes==

नोधस्
<u>'''Nodhas'''</u> is the name of a poet who is mentioned in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1626> i. 61, 14;<br> 62, 13;<br> 64, 1, and 124, 4, according to [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iv. 16.</ref> and to whom certain of its hymns are ascribed.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1626> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 18;<br> Rv. i. 58-64 are ascribed to him in the Anukramaṇī (Index).</ref> In the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1626> vii. 10, 10;<br> xxi. 9, 12. ''Cf.'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 27;<br> viii. 12. 17;<br> Av. xv. 2, 4;<br> 4, 4.</ref> he is called '''[[काक्षीवत|Kākṣīvata]],''' a ‘descendant of '''[[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]].'''’ Ludwig<ref name=fx4_ve1_1626> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 110.</ref> regards him as contemporary with the defeat of '''[[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]].''' He was a '''[[गोतम|Gotama]].'''<ref name=fx5_ve1_1626> Rv. i. 62, 13;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 125. For the controversy as to the meaning of Rv. i. 124, 4, see Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 137. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 33.</ref>

नौ
<u>'''Nau'''</u> is the regular word in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1627> i. 131, 2;<br> ii. 39, 4;<br> viii. 42, 3;<br> 83, 3, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1627> Av. ii. 36, 5;<br> v. 19. 8;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 3, 10, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 19;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 13;<br> vi. 6. 21;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 1, 4;<br> iv. 2, 5, 10, etc.</ref> for a ‘boat’ or ‘ship.’ In the great majority of cases the ship was merely a boat for crossing rivers, though no doubt a large boat was needed for crossing many of the broad rivers of the Panjab as well as the '''[[यमुना|Yamunā]]''' and '''[[गङ्गा|Gaṅgā]].''' Often no doubt the Nau was a mere dug-out canoe (''[[दारु|dāru]]'').<ref name=fx3_ve1_1627> Rv. x. 155, 3.</ref> It is certainly against the theory<ref name=fx4_ve1_1627> Wilson, ''Rigveda,'' 1, xli.</ref> of the existence in Vedic times of an extensive sea trade that there is no mention of any of the parts of a ship, such as masts and sails, except the oar ('''[[अरित्र|Aritra]]'''), Yet there are some allusions indicating a trade more extensive than that implied by boats used for crossing rivers. The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx5_ve1_1627> v. 19, 8. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 19, 139. So perhaps the passage, Rv. i. 32, 8, ''nadaṃ na bhinnam,'' refers to a ship. See '''[[नड|Naḍa]].'''</ref> compares the ruin of a kingdom where Brahmins are oppressed to the  sinking of a ship which is leaking (''bhinnā''); though the language here employed can be made to fit the theory that the ship was only a canoe, it cannot naturally be so interpreted. Moreover, there is mention made in the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve1_1627> Rv. i. 56, 2;<br> iv. 55, 6.</ref> of men who go to the ocean ('''[[सम्उद्र|Samudra]]''') eager for gain (''saniṣyavaḥ''). It is not altogether satisfactory to restrict such references with Zimmer<ref name=fx7_ve1_1627> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 22, 23.</ref> to the broad stream of the Indus after the union of that river with the tributaries of the Panjab. In the Rigveda<ref name=fx8_ve1_1627> i. 116, 3 ''et seq.''</ref> too it is said that the Aśvins rescued '''[[भुज्यु|Bhujyu]]''' in the ocean with a ship of a hundred oars (''śatāritra''). It is not easy to refuse to recognize here the existence of larger vessels with many oars used for sea voyages. The [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx9_ve1_1627> i. 2, 4;<br> ii. 2, 2. But it is not of very early date.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 255-257.</ref> at any rate, clearly refers to maritime navigation. See also '''[[सम्उद्र|Samudra]].'''

न्यग्-रोध
<u>'''Nyag-rodha,'''</u> ‘growing downwards,’ is the name of the ''Ficus indica,'' a tree remarkable for sending down from its branches fibres which take root and form new stems. Though the tree is not mentioned by name in the Rigveda, it appears to have been known, as Pischel<ref name=fx1_ve1_1628> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 113, 114.</ref> has shown from a hymn<ref name=fx2_ve1_1628> i. 24, 7, where ''[[स्तूप|stūpa]]'' seems to denote the crest or crown of the tree above the main trunk.</ref> in which its characteristics may be recognized. It is frequently mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_1628> iv. 37, 4;<br> v. 5, 5.</ref> and the later literature.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1628> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 30. 31;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 5, 13 xiii. 2, 7, 3;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 12, 1, etc.</ref> The sacrificial bowls ('''[[चमस|Camasa]]''') were made of its wood.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1628> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Samhitā, vii. 4, 12, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 13.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 58.</ref> It was doubtless of the greatest importance, as in modern times, to the Vedic village. The sister tree, the '''[[अश्वत्थ|Aśvattha]]''' (''Ficus religiosa''), already occurs in the Rigveda.

न्य्-अङ्क
<u>'''Ny-aṅka'''</u> in the dual denotes in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1629> i. 7, 7, 2.</ref> and [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1629> i. 3, 5, 4;<br> ii. 7, 8, 1.</ref> some part of the chariot, parallel with '''[[अङ्क|Aṅka]].''' The [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1629> i. 7, 5;<br> Lāṭyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 8, 9.</ref> has Nyaṅkū, the dual of [[न्यङ्कु|Nyaṅku]]. 

न्यङ्कु
<u>'''Nyaṅku'''</u> is the name of an animal in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or ‘horse sacrifice,’ in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1630> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 17, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 9;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 27. 32. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 83. The metre ''[[न्यङ्कु|nyaṅku]]-sāriṇī,'' ‘with a gazelle's gait,’ is already mentioned in the [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]] Prātiśākhya, xvi. 31;<br> [[छन्दस्|Chandas]], 5;<br> [[निदान|Nidāna]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 2.</ref> It seems clear that a kind a ‘gazelle’ is meant, but the commentary on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1630/> suggests ‘bear’ (''[[ऋक्ष|ṛkṣa]]'') as a variant rendering.

न्य्-अस्तिका
<u>'''Ny-astikā'''</u> seems in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1631> vi. 139, 1. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 385;<br> Bloomfield, ''ymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 539, 540.</ref> to denote a plant of some kind, identified by the scholiast with the Śaṅkhapuṣpikā (''Andropogon aciculatus'').

न्य्-ओचनी
<u>'''Ny-ocanī'''</u> is found in the marriage hymn of the Rigveda (x. 85, 6), where some kind of ornament worn by women seems to be meant. The commentator Sāyaṇa interprets it as ‘female slave.’<br>==Foot Notes==

पक्ति
<u>'''Pakti'''</u> denotes a cooked object, probably a kind of ‘cake,’ in the Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1633> Rv. iv. 24, 5. 7;<br> 25, 6. 7;<br> vi. 29, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxi. 59, etc.</ref> One who cooks food is called '''Paktṛ.'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1633> Av. x. 9, 7. 11. 25;<br> xi. 1, 17;<br> xii. 3, 17;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 4, 17;<br> x. 4, 2, 19.</ref>

पक्थ
<u>'''Paktha'''</u> is the name of a people in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1634> vii. 18. 7.</ref> where they appear as one of the tribes that opposed<ref name=fx2_ve1_1634> Roth, ''Zur Litteratur und Geschichte des Weda,'' 95, thought that the Pakthas were allies of the Trtsus, but this view is certainly incorrect. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 260.</ref> the '''[[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]]-Bharatas''' in the '''[[दाशराज्ञ|Dāśarājña]].''' or ‘battle of the ten kings.’ Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve1_1634> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 430, 431.</ref> compares  them with the tribe of  and their country , mentioned as in the north-west of India by Herodotus,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1634> vii. 65 ();<br> iii. 102 and iv. 44 ().</ref> and with the modern Pakhthūn in Eastern Afghanistan, holding that they were a northern tribe; this is probable, since the Bharatas seem to have occupied the [[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]], or ‘Middle Land.’ In three passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx5_ve1_1634> viii. 22, 10;<br> 49, 10;<br> x. 61, 1.</ref> a [[पक्थ|Paktha]] is referred to as a protégé of the Aśvins. The second connects him with '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]],''' whose tribe, the '''Pūrus,''' were aided by the Pakthas in their unsuccessful onslaught on '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]].''' In the third passage he seems specified as '''Tūrvāyaṇa,''' and appears as an opponent of '''Cyavāna.'''<ref name=fx6_ve1_1634> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 71-77.</ref> Probably, therefore, [[पक्थ|Paktha]] in all cases denotes the king of the [[पक्थ|Paktha]] people.

पक्व
<u>'''Pakva,'''</u> ‘cooked,’ is used substantively as meaning ‘cooked food’<ref name=fx1_ve1_1635> Rv. vi. 63, 9;<br> Av. vi. 119, 2;<br> xii. 3, 55;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 1, 26;<br> ii. 6, 1, 7, etc.</ref> or ‘cooked milk.’<ref name=fx2_ve1_1635> Rv. i. 62, 9;<br> 180, 3;<br> ii. 40, 2;<br> iii. 30, 14;<br> vi. 44, 24, etc.</ref> The word is also used of ‘baked’ bricks.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1635> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 1, 2, 22;<br> vii. 2, 1, 7.</ref>

पक्ष
<u>'''Pakṣa'''</u> is, in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1636> ix. 3, 4.</ref> applied to some part of a house, either the ‘side posts,’ according to Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1636> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> Zimmer,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1636> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 153.</ref> and Grill,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1636> ''Hundert Lieder^2,'' 188.</ref> or ‘sides,’ as understood by Whitney<ref name=fx5_ve1_1636> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 526.</ref> and Bloomfield.<ref name=fx6_ve1_1636> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 597.</ref> The description of the roof ('''[[छदिस्|Chadis]]''') in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx7_ve1_1636> iii. 7, 3.</ref> as ''catuṣ-[[पक्ष|pakṣa]],'' ‘four-sided,’ tells in favour of the second explanation. In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx8_ve1_1636> i. 5, 12, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 210.</ref> [[पक्ष|Pakṣa]] is used of the sides of a chariot. For [[पक्ष|Pakṣa]] as the ‘half’ of a month, see '''[[मास|Māsa]].''' 

पक्षस्
<u>'''Pakṣas'''</u> is found in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1637> viii. 8, 22.</ref> and the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1637> vii. 7.</ref> meaning the ‘sides’<ref name=fx3_ve1_1637> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 506;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 117.</ref> of a chariot. In the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx4_ve1_1637> xxx. 5.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_1637> i. 2, 3, 1.</ref> it is used of the sides of a hut or chamber ('''[[शाला|Śālā]]'''). In the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx6_ve1_1637> xxix. 5.</ref> it means the ‘wing’ of a door. In the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx7_ve1_1637> ii. 9.</ref> the ‘half’ of an army is so named, and in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx8_ve1_1637> xxiii. 6, 6.</ref> it means the ‘half’ of a month, or ‘fortnight.’ ''Cf.'' '''[[पक्ष|Pakṣa]].'''

पक्षिन्
<u>'''Pakṣin'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1638> i. 48. 5;<br> 182, 5;<br> x. 127, 5, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1638> Av. iv. 34, 4;<br> xi. 5, 21;<br> xii. 1, 51;<br> xiii. 2, 33;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 8;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 23;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 5, 18, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘winged’ creature, more particularly a ‘bird.’

पङ्क्ति
<u>'''Paṅkti,'''</u> originally a ‘set of five,’ denotes as early as the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1639> x. 117, 8, as taken by the St. Petersburg Dictionary.</ref> a ‘series’ generally. In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx2_ve1_1639> x. 38, 39.</ref> the word is used of the series of a man's ancestors whom he purifies by certain conduct.

पचत
<u>'''Pacata,'''</u> like '''[[पक्ति|Pakti]],''' denotes ‘cooked food’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1640> i. 61, 7;<br> x. 116, 8.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1640> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxi. 60;<br> xxiii. 13;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 21, etc.</ref>

पचन
<u>'''Pacana'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1641> i. 162, 6.</ref> and the Śatapatha Brāhamaṇa<ref name=fx2_ve1_1641> vi. 5, 43, 3. 4;<br> xiv. 1, 2, 21.</ref> denotes a ‘vessel for cooking’ food. 

पज्र
<u>'''Pajra'''</u> is the name of the family from which '''[[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]]''' sprang ('''[[पज्रिय|Pajriya]]'''). It is mentioned several times in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1642> i. 117, 10;<br> 122, 7. 8;<br> 126, 4. 5.</ref> According to Pischel,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1642> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 97, 98.</ref> the epithet ''[[पृक्ष-याम|pṛkṣa-yāma]]''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1642> Rv. i. 127, 8, where Roth (St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'') thinks this compound is probably a proper name.</ref> applied to them means ‘carrying out brilliant sacrificial performances,’ which won for them '''Śrutaratha's''' generosity. In two passages<ref name=fx4_ve1_1642> Rv. viii. 4, 17;<br> 6, 47.</ref> Roth<ref name=fx5_ve1_1642> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. [[पज्र|pajra]].''</ref> sees a [[पज्र|Pajra]] called Sāmaṅ. This is uncertain, but in any case a [[पज्र|Pajra]] seems clearly alluded to. Elsewhere<ref name=fx6_ve1_1642> Rv. i. 190, 5, where the reference is clearly hostile and contemptuous.</ref> it is very doubtful whether the word is a proper name at all. In the [[शाट्यायन|Śāṭyāyana]]<ref name=fx7_ve1_1642> Cited by Sāyaṇa on Rv. i. 51, 4.</ref> the Pajras are declared to be Aṅgirases.

पज्रा
<u>'''Pajrā'''</u> occurs once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1643> ix. 82, 14.</ref> where Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_1643> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 110.</ref> sees in the word the name of the wife of the sacrificer, '''[[पज्र|Pajra]],''' while Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_1643> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. [[पज्र|pajra]].''</ref> takes it to be an epithet (‘stout’) of the Soma plant. The sense is thus uncertain.

पज्रिय
<u>'''Pajriya'''</u> ‘descendant of [[पज्र|Pajra]],’ is the patronymic<ref name=fx1_ve1_1644> ''Cf.'' '''[[तुग्र्य|Tugrya]],''' n. 1.</ref> of '''[[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]]''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1644> i. 116, 7;<br> 117, 6;<br> 120, 5.</ref>

पञ्च-जनाः
<u>'''Pañca-janāḥ,'''</u> the ‘five peoples,’ are mentioned under various names in Vedic literature.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1645> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 31;<br> iv. 27;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 1, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, v. 6;<br> xxxii. 6;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 2, 9 (''[[पञ्च-जनाः|pañca-janāḥ]]'' as a compound). See also ''pañca mānuṣāḥ,'' Rv. viii. 9, 2;<br> ''mānavāḥ,'' Av. iii. 21, 5;<br> 24, 3;<br> xii. 1, 15;<br> ''janāḥ,'' Rv. iii. 37, 9;<br> 59, 8;<br> vi. 14, 4;<br> viii. 32, 22;<br> ix. 65, 23;<br> 92, 3;<br> x. 45, 6;<br> ''kṛṣṭayaḥ,'' ii. 2, 10;<br> iii. 53, 16;<br> iv. 38, 10;<br> x. 60, 4;<br> 119, 6;<br> Av. iii. 24, 3;<br> ''kṣitayaḥ,'' Rv. i. 7, 9;<br> 176, 3;<br> v. 35, 2;<br> vi. 46, 7;<br> vii. 75, 4;<br> 79, 1;<br> ''carṣaṇyaḥ,'' Rv. v. 86, 2;<br> vii. 15, 2;<br> ix. 101, 9. See Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 204. Every book of the Rigveda has a mention of the five peoples: one such in ii. and iv.;<br> two in i., v., vi., vii., viii.;<br> three in iii. and ix.;<br> four in x.</ref> Who are meant by the five is very uncertain. The [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1645> iii. 31.</ref> explains the five to be gods, men, Gandharvas and Apsarases, snakes, and the Fathers.  [[औपमन्यव|Aupamanyava]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1645> In [[यास्क|Yāska]], [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 8.</ref> held that the four castes ('''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]]''') and the '''Niṣādas''' made up the five, and Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx4_ve1_1645> On Rv. i. 7, 9, etc.</ref> is of the same opinion. [[यास्क|Yāska]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_1645> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> thinks that the five are the Gandharvas, fathers, gods, Asuras, and Rakṣases. No one of these explanations can be regarded as probable. Roth<ref name=fx6_ve1_1645> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. [[कृष्टि|kṛṣṭi]], [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], Erläuterungen,'' 28. For his view, Av. iii. 24, 3, can be cited: ''pañca pradiśo mānavīḥ pañca kṛṣṭayaḥ,'' ‘the five directions, the five races of men.’</ref> and Geldner<ref name=fx7_ve1_1645> ''Siebenzig Lieder,'' 18. See, however, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]], Glossar,'' 103, where he recognizes the use of the phrase to denote five tribes, as well as all mankind.</ref> think that all the peoples of the earth are méant: just as there are four quarters ('''[[दिश्|Diś]]'''), there are peoples at the four quarters (N. E. S. W.), with the Āryan folk in the middle. Zimmer<ref name=fx8_ve1_1645> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 119-123. His view is accepted by Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 153;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 179, is doubtful.</ref> opposes this view on the ground that the inclusion of all peoples in one expression is not in harmony with the distinction so often made between Āryan and [[दास|Dāsa]]; that neither ''janāsaḥ,'' ‘men,’<ref name=fx9_ve1_1645> ''Cf.'' its use in Rv. ii. 12, ''sa janāsa Indraḥ,'' where the address must be to Āryan men.</ref> nor ''mānuṣāḥ,'' ‘people,’<ref name=fx10_ve1_1645> ''Cf.'' Rv. viii. 9, 2, and i. 52, 9, with viii. 70, 11;<br> x. 28, 8.</ref> could be used of non-Āryans; that the Soma is referred to as being among the five tribes;<ref name=fx11_ve1_1645> Rv. ix. 65, 23.</ref> that the five tribes are mentioned as on the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]],'''<ref name=fx12_ve1_1645> Rv. vi. 61, 12 ''(pañca jātā). Cf.'' x. 53, 4.</ref> and that Indra is ''[[पाञ्चजन्य|pāñcajanya]],''<ref name=fx13_ve1_1645> v. 32, 11. Agni is ‘of the five tribes,’ Rv. ix. 66, 20. Atri also is so described, Rv. i. 117, 3.</ref> ‘belonging to the five peoples.’ He concludes that Āryans alone are meant, and in particular the five tribes of the '''Anus, Druhyus, Yadus, Turvaśas,''' and '''Pūrus,''' who are all mentioned together in one or perhaps two hymns of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx14_ve1_1645> Rv. i. 108, 8. In vii. 18, cited by Zimmer, 122, the five tribes do not occur ''eo nomine,'' for '''[[यक्षु|Yakṣu]]''' replaces Yadu. But it is probable that Yadu is meant by [[यक्षु|Yakṣu]].</ref> and four of whom occur in another hymn.<ref name=fx15_ve1_1645> Rv. viii. 10, 5.</ref> But he admits that the expression might easily be used more generally later. Hopkins<ref name=fx16_ve1_1645> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 260.</ref> has combated Zimmer's view, but his own opinion rests mainly on his theory that there was no people named [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]], but only a king of the Yadus called [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]], and that theory is not very probable. <br><br>In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx17_ve1_1645> xiii. 5, 4, 14.</ref> and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx18_ve1_1645> viii. 23.</ref> the five peoples are opposed to the Bharatas, and in the former work<ref name=fx19_ve1_1645> It is a conjecture of Weber's, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 202, that the five peoples are identical with the '''Pañcālas,''' and the seven mentioned in Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 23, with the Kuru-Pañcālas.</ref> seven peoples are alluded to.

पञ्च-दशी
<u>'''Pañca-daśī,'''</u> ‘the fifteenth day of the month,’ is already mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 5, 10, 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

पञ्च-नद
<u>'''Pañca-nada,'''</u> ‘having five streams,’ is not found until the epic period as the name of the Panjāb, which has no designation in the earlier literature. The importance of the Panjāb as the home<ref name=fx1_ve1_1647> See, ''e.g.,'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 32 ''et seq.''</ref> of the Rigveda has been greatly diminished by recent research, Hopkins,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1647> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 19-28. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 145, 441.</ref> Pischel,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1647> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 218.</ref> and Geldner<ref name=fx4_ve1_1647> ''Ibid.,'' 3, 152.</ref> having on different grounds shown reason for believing that the Rigveda, at least in great part, was composed farther east, in the '''[[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]],''' which admittedly was the home of the later Vedic culture. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx5_ve1_1647> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 98 ''et seq.'' But see '''Divodāsa.''' ''Cf.'' also Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 189.</ref> considers that the Rigveda belongs in part to the Panjāb, or rather to Arachosia, and in part to the Middle Country. See also '''Kuru, [[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]].'''

पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण
<u>'''Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa.'''</u> See '''Tāṇdya.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

पञ्चाल
<u>'''Pañcāla'''</u> is the later name<ref name=fx1_ve1_1649> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 7.</ref> of the people called '''[[क्रिवि|Krivi]]''' in the Rigveda. The Pañcālas are rarely referred to except in connexion with the '''Kurus,''' and the kings of the Kuru-Pañcālas are mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1649> viii. 14</ref> In the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve1_1649> xxx. 2 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 471).</ref> the Pañcālas appear as the people of '''[[केशिन्|Keśin]] [[दाल्भ्य|Dālbhya]].'''  In the Upaniṣads and later<ref name=fx4_ve1_1649> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 1 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 2, 1 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 3, 1;<br> [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]] Prātiśākhya, ii. 12, 44;<br> [[निदान|Nidāna]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 6;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 13, 6, etc.</ref> the Brahmins of the Pañcālas figure as taking part in philosophical and philological discussions. The Saṃhitopaniṣad [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_1649> 2. ''Cf. Indische Studien,'' 4, 375, n.;<br> 8, 92, n. 1.</ref> makes mention of the [[प्राच्य|Prācya]]-Pañcālas.<br><br>The Pañcālas, no doubt, included other tribes besides the Krivis. The name seems to refer to five tribes, and it has been suggested<ref name=fx6_ve1_1649> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 202;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 108, n. 1. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 1, 191 ''et seq.'';<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 10, 90, 114, 115, 125, 135, 136.</ref> that the Pañcālas represent the five tribes of the Rigveda, but the suggestion is not very probable. There is no trace in Vedic literature of the Epic division of the Pañcālas into northern (''uttara'') and southern (''dakṣiṇa''). The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx7_ve1_1649> xiii. 5, 4, 7.</ref> mentions their town '''[[परिचक्रा|Paricakrā]];''' other towns to which allusion seems to be made were '''[[काम्पील|Kāmpīla]]''' and kauśāmbī.<ref name=fx8_ve1_1649> See '''[[कौशाम्बेय|Kauśāmbeya]].'''</ref> Of their kings and chiefs, as distinguished from kings of the Kuru-Pañcālas, we hear of '''[[क्रैव्य|Kraivya]], [[दुर्मुख|Durmukha]], [[प्रवाहण जैवलि|Pravāhaṇa Jaivali]],''' and '''Śona.'''

पञ्चाल-चण्ड
<u>'''Pañcāla-caṇḍa'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1650> iii. 1, 6.</ref> and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1650> vii. 18.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 391;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 50, 315, 326.</ref> Āraṇyakas.

पञ्चावि
<u>'''Pañcāvi'''</u> occurs several times in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1651> xviii. 26;<br> xxi. 14;<br> xxiv. 12;<br> xxviii. 26.</ref> in the sense of ‘aged five lamb-periods’ (of six months), that is, ‘thirty months old.’<ref name=fx2_ve1_1651> ''Cf.'' '''[[त्र्य्अवि|Tryavi]].'''</ref>

पञ्चौदन
<u>'''Pañcaudana'''</u> is an adjective in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1652> iv. 14, 7;<br> ix. 5, 8 ''et seq.''</ref> meaning ‘prepared with five rice-messes.’ The cooking of five rice dishes is referred to in the same Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1652> ix. 5, 37.</ref> 

पटल
<u>'''Paṭala'''</u> as early as the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1653> i. 21. 22.</ref> denotes ‘section’ of a work, a sense occurring in the Sūtras<ref name=fx2_ve1_1653> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xi. 9. 20;<br> xiii. 21, 2;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 6. 7.</ref> and later.

पठर्वन्
<u>'''Paṭharvan'''</u> appears to be the name of a man in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1654> i. 112, 17, with Sāyaṇa's note.</ref> According to Ludwig,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1654> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 204.<br><br>''Cf.'' Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 147, 148.</ref> however, the word is Paṭharu, and is the name of a fort which was saved by a rain-storm from being set on fire.

पड्गृभि
<u>'''Paḍgṛbhi,'''</u> ‘seizing by the foot,’<ref name=fx1_ve1_1655> But it may mean ‘seizing with a cord.’ ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 34 (top);<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 236.</ref> is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1655> x. 49, 5.</ref> of either a man<ref name=fx3_ve1_1655> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 165.</ref> or a demon. See also '''[[पड्बीश|Paḍbīśa]].'''

पड्-बीश
<u>'''Paḍ-bīśa,'''</u> the ‘foot-fetter’ of a horse in five passages, two in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1656> i. 162, 14. 16 = [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 6, 9, 1. 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxv. 38. 39.</ref> and one each in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_1656> vi. 2, 13 (Mādhyaṃdina).</ref> the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx3_ve1_1656> v. 1, 12.</ref> and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1656> ix. 7;<br> Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 57, n. 3.</ref> Elsewhere<ref name=fx5_ve1_1656> Rv. x. 97, 16;<br> Av. viii. 1, 4;<br> xii. 5, 15;<br> xvi. 8, 27;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 10, 3;<br> [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 10.</ref> its uses are metaphorical. According to Roth,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1656> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> the literal sense is ‘foot-fastening’ (''paḍ'' being = ''pad,'' ‘foot,’ and ''bīśa,'' written ''vīśa'' in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, being connected with the Latin ''vincire,'' ‘bind’). Pischel<ref name=fx7_ve1_1656> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 233-236.</ref> objects that the sense of ‘foot-fastening’ involves the absurdity, in the [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] passages, of a fine horse from the '''[[सिन्धु|Sindhu]]''' (Indus) being spoken of as tearing up the peg to which it is fastened. He suggests instead the meaning of ‘hobble,’ which must be right.<ref name=fx8_ve1_1656> He explains the first part of the word as derived from ''paś,'' ‘tie.’ ''Cf.'' Macdoneli, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 34 (top). But the form ''paḍ'' may be due to a false analogy, and the sense of ‘footfastener’ may express ‘hobble’ quite satisfactorily;<br> it is not confined to a rope tied to a peg in the ground.</ref> 

पण
<u>'''Paṇa,'''</u> with '''[[प्रतिपण|Pratipaṇa]],''' is found in a hymn of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1657> iii. 15, 4. 6 (in the Paippalāda recension;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 112).</ref> denoting the process of bargaining and selling. The root ''paṇ,'' from which the word is derived, is employed in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1657> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, viii. 55;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 3, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 27. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 10, 1.</ref> while Paṇana in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1657> iii. 3, 2, 19. The root does not occur in the Rigveda, but its etymology is vouched for by the Greek , ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 84, n. 3.</ref> denotes ‘trafficking.’ ''Cf.'' '''[[वणिज्|Vaṇij]].'''

पणि
<u>'''Paṇi'''</u> in the Rigveda appears to denote a person who is rich, but who does not give offerings to the gods, or bestow '''Dakṣiṇās''' on the priests, and who is therefore an object of intense dislike to the composers of the Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1658> Rv. i. 33, 3;<br> 83, 2;<br> 151, 9;<br> 180, 7;<br> iv. 28, 7;<br> v. 34, 5-7;<br> 61, 8;<br> vi. 13, 3;<br> 53, 3;<br> viii. 64, 2;<br> 97, 2;<br> x. 60, 6;<br> Av. v. 11, 7;<br> xx. 128, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxv. 1.</ref> Hence the gods are asked to attack the Paṇis, who are also referred to as being defeated with slaughter.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1658> Rv. 1, 83, 4;<br> 184, 2;<br> iii. 58, 2;<br> v. 34, 7;<br> 61, 8;<br> vi. 13, 3;<br> 20, 4;<br> 33, 2;<br> viii. 64, 11.</ref> The [[पणि|Paṇi]] is opposed to the pious sacrificer as a niggard,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1658> Rv. i. 124, 10;<br> iv. 51, 3;<br> viii. 45, 14 (where the sense is doubtful). ''Cf.'' i. 93, 4;<br> v. 61, 1.</ref> and is spoken of as a wolf,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1658> Rv. vi. 51, 14.</ref> the symbol of enmity. In some passages<ref name=fx5_ve1_1658> Rv. i. 32, 11;<br> ii. 24, 6;<br> iv. 58, 4;<br> vi. 44, 22;<br> vii. 9, 2;<br> x. 67, 6;<br> 92, 3;<br> Av. iv. 23, 5;<br> xix. 46, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 8, 2, 3. It is impossible definitely to decide in which passages the mythical sense is meant, ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 157.</ref> the Paṇis definitely appear as mythological figures, demons who withhold the cows or waters of heaven, and to whom Saramā goes on a mission from Indra.<ref name=fx6_ve1_1658> Rv. x. 108.</ref> Among the Paṇis '''[[बृबु|Bṛbu]]''' was apparently important. In one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx7_ve1_1658> Rv. viii. 66, 10.</ref> they are described as '''Bekanāṭas,''' or ‘usurers’ (?). In another<ref name=fx8_ve1_1658> Rv. vii. 6, 3.</ref> they are called '''Dasyus,''' and styled ''[[मृध्र-वाच्|mṛdhra-vāc]],'' probably ‘of hostile speech,’ and ''grathin,'' a word of uncertain meaning. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx9_ve1_1658> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 89.</ref> thinks that the latter epithet refers to the continuous flow of a speech which  is not understood, and that ''[[मृध्र-वाच्|mṛdhra-vāc]]'' means ‘śpeaking an enemy's speech,’ though not necessarily with reference to non-Āryans.<ref name=fx10_ve1_1658> See Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 1, 23;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 2^2, 114;<br> Davidson, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 37, 23;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 31, n. 3.</ref> In two passages<ref name=fx11_ve1_1658> Rv. v. 34, 5-7;<br> Av. v. 11, 6.</ref> the Paṇis appear as '''Dāsas,''' and in one<ref name=fx12_ve1_1658> Rv. v. 61, 8. ''Cf.'' Roth, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 41, 673;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 361, who thinks that the [[पणि|Paṇi]] is compared unfavourably with a generous woman, but this is unlikely;<br> Hillebrandt, 1, 92, n. 3;<br> Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 58, 59 Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 364.</ref> a [[पणि|Paṇi]] is mentioned in connexion with wergeld ('''[[वैर|Vaira]]'''), being apparently regarded as equal to a man merely in the price put on his life, but in other respects as inferior.<br><br>It is difficult to be certain exactly who a [[पणि|Paṇi]] was. Roth<ref name=fx13_ve1_1658> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Cf.'' [[यास्क|Yāska]], [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 17;<br> vi. 26.</ref> thinks that the word is derived from ''paṇ,'' ‘barter,’ and that the [[पणि|Paṇi]] is properly the man who will give nothing without return, hence the niggard, who neither worships the gods nor rewards their priests. This view is accepted by Zimmer<ref name=fx14_ve1_1658> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 257. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Geldner, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]], Glossar,'' 103.</ref> and by Ludwig.<ref name=fx15_ve1_1658> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 213215. ''Cf.'' Bergaigne, ''Religion Védique,'' 2, 319.</ref> The latter scholar thinks the apparent references to fights with Paṇis are to be explained by their having been aboriginal traders who went in caravans--as in Arabia and Northern Africa--prepared to fight, if need be, to protect their goods against attacks which the Āryans would naturally deem quite justified. He supports this explanation by the references to the Paṇis as Dasyus and Dāsas. It is, however, hardly necessary to do more than regard the Paṇis generally as non-worshippers of the gods favoured by the singers; the term is wide enough to cover either the aborigines or hostile Āryan tribes, as well as demons. Hillebrandt,<ref name=fx16_ve1_1658> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 83 ''et seq.;<br>'' 3, 268;<br> ''Go7ttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen,'' 1894, 648.</ref> however, thinks that a real tribe is meant, the Parnians of Strabo, and that they were associated with the Dahae ('''[[दास|Dāsa]]'''). Moreover, he finds them associated in one passage<ref name=fx17_ve1_1658> Rv. vi. 61, 1-3.</ref> with the '''Pārāvatas,''' whom  he identifies with the  of Ptolemy,<ref name=fx18_ve1_1658> vi. 20, 3.</ref> and with '''Bṛṣaya,''' whom he connects with  of Arrian;<ref name=fx19_ve1_1658> iii. 8, 4.</ref> he also considers that the frequent<ref name=fx20_ve1_1658> The Paṇis occur twelve times in Maṇḍala vi.;<br> once each in ii. and viii.;<br> twice in v. and ix.;<br> thrice in iv. and vii.;<br> six times in viii.;<br> nine times in i.;<br> and four times in x., besides the references in the Saramā hymn, x. 108.</ref> mention of the Paṇis as opponents of '''Divodāsa''' shows that the latter was on the Arachosian Haraqaiti ('''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]''') fighting against the Parnians and Dahae, as well as other Iranian tribes. But the identification of [[पणि|Paṇi]] and the Parnians is needless, especially as the root ''paṇ,'' which is found also in the Greek , shows a satisfactory derivation, while the transfer of Divodāsa to the Haraqaiti is improbable. See also '''Divodāsa''' and '''[[बेकनाट|Bekanāṭa]].'''

पण्डित
<u>'''Paṇḍita,'''</u> a ‘learned man,’ is not found until the [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] period.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1659> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 4, 1;<br> vi. 4, 16. 17;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 14, 2;<br> Muṇḍaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 2, 8, etc.</ref>

पतङ्ग
<u>'''1. Pataṅga,'''</u> ‘flying,’ denotes a ‘winged insect’ in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1660> vi. 50, 1.</ref> and the Upaniṣads.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1660> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 19 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 2, 14 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> 2, 14 (= 1, 14);<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 9, 3;<br> 10, 2;<br> vii. 2, 1;<br> 7, 1;<br> 8, 1;<br> 10, 1;<br> Adbhuta [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 5 (''Indische Studien,'' 1, 40).</ref>

पतङ्ग प्राजापत्य
<u>'''2. Pataṅga Prājāpatya'''</u> (‘descendant of Prajāpati’) is credited by the Anukramaṇī (Index) with the authorship of a hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1661> x. 177, 1.</ref> in which [[पतङ्ग|Pataṅga]] means the ‘sun-bird.’ He is also mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1661> iii. 30, 1. ''Cf.'' [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 8;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xi. 14, 28.</ref>

पतञ्चल काप्य
<u>'''Patañcala Kāpya'''</u> is the name of a sage mentioned twice in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1662> iii. 3, 1;<br> 7, 1.</ref> According to Weber,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1662> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 434, 435;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 126, 137, 223, 236, 237.</ref> his  name is reminiscent of '''[[कपिल|Kapila]]''' and Patañjali of the ŚāṅkhyaYoga system, but this suggestion may be regarded as quite improbable.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1662> ''Cf.'' Garbe, ''Sāṅkhya Philosophie,'' 25, 26.</ref>

पतत्रिन्
<u>'''Patatrin'''</u> denotes a ‘flying creature’ generally in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1663> iii. 3, 3.</ref> or more particularly a ‘bird’ in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1663> viii. 7, 24;<br> x. 10, 14;<br> xiv. 2, 44.</ref>

पताका
<u>'''Patākā,'''</u> ‘banner,’ is not found until the Adbhuta [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1664> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 39, 41 (here erroneously mentioned as ''patāka,'' masculine).</ref> Its Vedic equivalent is '''[[ध्वज|Dhvaja]].'''

पति
<u>'''Pati, Patnī.'''</u>--Under these words denoting primarily, as the evidence collected in the St. Petersburg Dictionary shows, ‘lord’ and ‘lady,’ and so ‘husband’ and ‘wife,’ it is convenient to consider the marital relations of the Vedic community.<br><br>''Child Marriage.''--Marriage in the early Vedic texts appears essentially as a union of two persons of full development. This is shown by the numerous references<ref name=fx1_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 117, 7;<br> ii. 17, 7;<br> x. 39, 3;<br> 40, 5. '''[[घोषा|Ghoṣā]]''' is the chief example of this condition. The Atharvaveda (i. 14) also refers to such a case (see Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 253). The ornaments of maidens, especially at seasons of festival, are referred to in Rv. i. 123, 11;<br> vii. 2, 5;<br> Av. ii. 36, 1;<br> xiv. 2, 59 ''et seq.''</ref> to unmarried girls who grow old in the house of their fathers (''[[अमा-जुर्|amā-jur]]''), and who adorn themselves in desire of marriage, as well as to the paraphernalia of spells and potions used in the Atharvavedic tradition<ref name=fx2_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' Av. iii. 18 (= Rv. x. 145);<br> vi. 89;<br> 102;<br> 130;<br> 131;<br> vii. 36;<br> 37;<br> 38. Similarly there are many references to the love of the youth for the maiden, and his seeking her--''e.g.,'' Rv. i. 115, 2;<br> Av. ii. 30;<br> iii. 25;<br> vi. 8;<br> 9;<br> 82;<br> to their mutual affection--''e.g.,'' Rv. i. 167, 3;<br> ix. 32, 5;<br> 56, 3;<br> x. 34, 5;<br> and to jealousy and love philtres for the purpose of recalling wandering affections -''e.g.,'' Av. vi. 18;<br> 42;<br> 43;<br> 94;<br> 139;<br> vii. 45. The gifts of the lover are referred to in Rv. i. 117, 18. Some of these passages may, of course, refer to Hetairai, but not all.</ref> to compel the love of man or woman respectively, while even the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_1665> vii. 55, 5. 8. ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 134, 3;<br> Aufrecht, ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 337 ''et seq.'' A different view of the passage is taken by Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 57 ''et seq.'' The Atharvaveda (iv. 5) shows that the view of Aufrecht was that early adopted in India.</ref> itself seems to present us with a spell by which a  lover seeks to send all the household to sleep when he visits his beloved. Child wives first occur regularly in the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] period, though it is still uncertain to what extent the rule of marriage before puberty there obtained.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 59;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 340 ''et seq.;<br>'' 23, 356;<br> Risley, ''People of India,'' 179 ''et seq.'' There is a possible reference to a child-wife in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 10, 1. For the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] evidence, see Bhandarkar, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gesellschaft,'' 47, 143-156;<br> Jolly, ''ibid.,'' 46, 413-426;<br> 47, 610-615.</ref> The marriage ritual also quite clearly presumes that the marriage is a real and not a nominal one: an essential feature is the taking of the bride to her husband's home, and the ensuing cohabitation.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1665> Rv. x. 85, especially verse 29 ''et seq.''</ref><br><br>''Limitations on Marriage.''--It is difficult to say with certainty within what limits marriage was allowed. The dialogue of Yama and Yamī in the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve1_1665> x. 10.</ref> seems clearly to point to a prohibition of the marriage of brother and sister. It can hardly be said, as Weber<ref name=fx7_ve1_1665> ''Proceedings of the Berlin Academy,'' 1895, 822. ''Cf.'' also ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 427;<br> 10, 76, n.;<br> Pischel, ''Hermes,'' 18, 465-468;<br> Max Müller, ''Science of Language,'' 2, 507;<br> Herodotus, iii. 19. Crawley's ''Mystic Rose'' gives strong reasons against the early prevalence of such marriages.</ref> thinks, to point to a practice that was once in use and later became antiquated. In the Gobhila [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx8_ve1_1665> iii. 4, 5.</ref> and the [[धर्म|Dharma]] Sūtras<ref name=fx9_ve1_1665> Āpastamba [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 5, 15, 16, etc. ''Cf.'' [[मानव|Mānava]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] Śāstra, iii. 5;<br> [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] Śāstra, i. 52, 53.</ref> are found prohibitions against marriage in the '''[[गोत्र|Gotra]]''' (‘family’) or within six degrees on the mother's or father's side, but in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx10_ve1_1665> i. 8, 3, 6.</ref> marriage is allowed in the third or fourth generation, the former being allowed, according to Harisvamin,<ref name=fx11_ve1_1665> On Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> by the Kāṇvas, and the second by the Saurāṣṭras, while the Dākṣiṇātyas allowed marriage with the daughter of the mother's brother or the son of the father's sister, but presumably not with the daughter of the mother's sister or the son of the father's brother. The prohibition of marriage within the [[गोत्र|Gotra]] cannot then have existed,<ref name=fx12_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 75, 76;<br> Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 387;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 392;<br> Geiger, ''Ostiranische Kultur,'' 246;<br> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 43, 308-312;<br> Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 62, 63;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 345 ''et seq.''</ref> though naturally marriages  outside the [[गोत्र|Gotra]] were frequent.<ref name=fx13_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 51, 279.</ref> Similarity of caste was also not an essential to marriage, as hypergamy was permitted even by the [[धर्म|Dharma]] Sūtras,<ref name=fx14_ve1_1665> [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 16;<br> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 16, 2-5;<br> [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 24;<br> 25;<br> Pāraskara [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 4, etc.;<br> Risley, ''People of India,'' 156 ''et seq. Cf.'' '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]].'''</ref> so that a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] could marry wives of any lower caste, a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] wives of the two lowest castes as well as of his own caste, a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] a [[शूद्रा|Śūdrā]] as well as a Vaiśyā, although the [[शूद्रा|Śūdrā]] marriages were later disapproved ''in toto.'' Instances of such intermarriage are common in the Epic, and are viewed as normal in the Bṛhaddevatā.<ref name=fx15_ve1_1665> See Hopkins, cited in note 12;<br> Bṛhaddevatā, v. 79;<br> and '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]].'''</ref><br><br>It was considered proper that the younger brothers and sisters should not anticipate their elders by marrying before them. The later Saṃhitās and Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx16_ve1_1665> See Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 578 ''et seq.''</ref> present a series of names expressive of such anticipation, censuring as sinful those who bear them. These terms are the ''pari-vividāna,''<ref name=fx17_ve1_1665> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 9, and [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] and Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitās, cited by Delbrück, 579, 580;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 9. In Āpastamba [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 5, 12, 22, the expression is ''paryāhita.''</ref> or perhaps ''agre-dadhus,''<ref name=fx18_ve1_1665> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 9, according to Delbrūck, 581. But, as ''pari-vividāna'' follows, it seems very doubtful;<br> the reading is probably wrong, especially in view of the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] and Kapiṣṭhala parallels, which have ''agre-didhiṣau'' and ''agre-dadhiṣau.''</ref> the man who, though a younger brother, marries before his elder brother, the latter being then called the ''[[परिवित्त|parivitta]];''<ref name=fx19_ve1_1665> See passages cited in note 17;<br> also Av. vi. 112, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 8, 11. Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 12, 11, and [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 5, 12, 22, add ''parivinna'' to ''[[परिवित्त|parivitta]],'' but probably the two words should be identical in sense.</ref> the ''agre-[[दिधिषु|didhiṣu]],''<ref name=fx20_ve1_1665> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā (see note 17) has ''agre-[[दिधिषु|didhiṣu]];<br>'' Kapiṣṭhala, ''agre-dadhiṣu;<br>'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 8, 11, ''agra-[[दिधिषु|didhiṣu]].'' The [[धर्म|Dharma]] Sūtras adopt ''agre-[[दिधिषु|didhiṣu]].''</ref> the man who weds a younger daughter while her elder sister is still unmarried; and the '''[[दिधिषू-पति|Didhiṣū-pati]],'''<ref name=fx21_ve1_1665> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā has ''[[दिधिषू-पति|didhiṣū-pati]];<br>'' Kapiṣṭhala, ''dadhiṣū-pati;<br>'' and so the [[धर्म|Dharma]] Sūtras. Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 9, has the corrupt ''[[एदिधिषुः-पति|edidhiṣuḥ-pati]].''</ref> who is the husband of the latter. The passages do not explicitly say that the exact order of birth must always be followed, but the mention of the terms shows that the order was often broken.<br><br>''Widow Remarriage.''--The remarriage of a widow was  apparently permitted. This seems originally to have taken the form of the marriage of the widow to the brother or other nearest kinsman of the dead man in order to produce children. At any rate, the ceremony is apparently alluded to in a funeral hymn of the Rigveda;<ref name=fx22_ve1_1665> x. 18, 8.</ref> for the alternative explanation, which sees in the verse a reference to the ritual of the Puruṣamendha (‘human sacrifice’), although accepted by Hillebrandt<ref name=fx23_ve1_1665> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 40, 708.</ref> and Delbrück,<ref name=fx24_ve1_1665> ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 553. ''Cf.'' also Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 385;<br> for the other view, see Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 848;<br> Roth, ''Siebenzig Lieder,'' 151, n.;<br> Zimmer. ''Altindisches Leben,'' 329.</ref> is not at all probable, while the ordinary view is supported by the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] evidence.<ref name=fx25_ve1_1665> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 2, 18. ''Cf.'' Lanman in Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 849.</ref> Moreover, another passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx26_ve1_1665> x. 40, 2.</ref> clearly refers to the marriage of the widow and the husband's brother (''[[देवृ|devṛ]]''), which constitutes what the Indians later knew as Niyoga.<ref name=fx27_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' [[यास्क|Yāska]], [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 15, with Roth's note;<br> Geldner, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]], Kommentar,'' 160;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' v, 343, n.;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 355, n., 367;<br> Jolly, ''Ṛecht und Sitte,'' 71;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 459;<br> von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 429. The custom died out in later times, is seems.</ref> This custom was probably not followed except in cases where no son was already born. This custom was hardly remarriage in the strict sense, since the brother might--so far as appears--be already married himself. In the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx28_ve1_1665> ix. 5, 27. 28.</ref> a verse refers to a charm which would secure the reunion, in the next world, of a wife and her second husband. Though, as Delbrück<ref name=fx29_ve1_1665> ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 553-555. ''Cf.'' Jolly, ''Rechtund Sitte,'' 59;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 371, n.</ref> thinks, this very possibly refers to a case in which the first husband was still alive,<ref name=fx30_ve1_1665> This is certainly the case in Av. v. 17, 8, which, however, merely exalts the sanctity of the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], and does not necessarily imply remarriage at all.</ref> but was impotent or had lost caste (''patita''),<ref name=fx31_ve1_1665> ''E.g.,'' [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 2, 3, 27.</ref> still it is certain that the later [[धर्म|Dharma]] Sūtras<ref name=fx32_ve1_1665> [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvii. 19. 20. 72-74;<br> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 1, 16;<br> [[मानव|Mānava]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] Śāstra, ix. 175. ''Cf.'' also Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 281;<br> 5, 306.</ref> began to recognize ordinary remarriage in case of the death of the first husband.  Pischel<ref name=fx33_ve1_1665> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 27.</ref> finds some evidence in the Rigveda<ref name=fx34_ve1_1665> vi. 49, 8. ''Cf.'' Mahābhārata, iii. 70, 26.</ref> to the effect that a woman could remarry if her husband disappeared and could not be found or heard of.<br><br>''Polygamy.''--A Vedic Indian could have more than one wife. This is proved clearly by many passages in the Rigveda;<ref name=fx35_ve1_1665> Rv. i. 62, 11;<br> 71, 1;<br> 104, 3;<br> 105, 8;<br> 112, 19;<br> 186, 7;<br> vi. 53, 4;<br> vii. 18, 2;<br> 26, 3;<br> x. 43, 1;<br> 101, 11. ''Cf.'' Av. iii. 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 1, 4, etc. See Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 455 ''et seq.;<br>'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 387;<br> Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 64;<br> von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 430, 431;<br> Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 539, 540;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 353;<br> Bloomfield, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 561.</ref> Manu, according to the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx36_ve1_1665> i. 5, 8.</ref> had ten wives; and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx37_ve1_1665> ix. 1, 4, 6.</ref> explains polygamy by a characteristic legend. Moreover, the king regularly has four wives attributed to him, the [[महिषी|Mahiṣī]],<ref name=fx38_ve1_1665> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 9, 4, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 1, 4;<br> vi. 5, 3, 1;<br> vii. 5, 1, 1;<br> xiii. 2, 6, 4;<br> 4, 1, 8;<br> 5, 2, 2. 5. 9;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xix. 1, 4. ''Cf.'' Rv. v. 2, 2;<br> 37, 3;<br> Av. ii. 36, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 9, 1;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 220.</ref> the Parivṛktī,<ref name=fx39_ve1_1665> ''[[परि-वृक्ता|Pari-vṛktā]]'' occurs in Rv. x. 102, 11;<br> Av. vii. 113, 2;<br> xx. 128, 10. 11;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 2, 6, 6;<br> 4, 1, 8;<br> 5, 2, 7;<br> ''parivṛktī'' in [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 9, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7. 3, 4;<br> iii. 9, 4, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, x. 10;<br> xv. 4;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 1, 13.</ref> the [[वावाता|Vāvātā]],<ref name=fx40_ve1_1665> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 22;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 3, 3;<br> iii. 9, 4, 4;<br> Av. xx. 128, 10. 11;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 2, 6, 5;<br> 4, 1, 8;<br> 5, 2, 6. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 308, n.;<br> Bloomfield, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 553, 554.</ref> and the [[पालागली|Pālāgalī]].<ref name=fx41_ve1_1665> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 3, 3 ''et seq.;<br>'' iii. 9, 4, 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 1, 8;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 4, 4.</ref> The [[महिषी|Mahiṣī]] appears to be the chief wife, being the first one married according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx42_ve1_1665> vi. 5, 3, 1.</ref> The Parivṛktī, ‘the neglected,’ is explained by Weber<ref name=fx43_ve1_1665> ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 6.</ref> and Pischel<ref name=fx44_ve1_1665> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 199. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''ibid.,'' 2, 38.</ref> as one that has had no son. The [[वावाता|Vāvātā]] is ‘the favourite,’ while the [[पालागली|Pālāgalī]] is, according to Weber, the daughter of the last of the court officials. The names are curious, and not very intelligible, but the evidence points to the wife first wedded alone being a wife in the fullest sense. This view is supported by the fact emphasized by  Delbrück,<ref name=fx45_ve1_1665> ''Indogermanische'' Verwandtschaftsnamen, 539. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 325. [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]] had, however, two apparently equal wives (Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 1, and ''cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 10, 3).</ref> that in the sacrifice the [[पत्नी|Patnī]] is usually mentioned in the singular, apparent exceptions being due to some mythological reason.<ref name=fx46_ve1_1665> ''E.g.,'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 6, 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 3, 1.</ref> Zimmer<ref name=fx47_ve1_1665> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 323.</ref> is of opinion that polygamy is dying out in the Rigvedic period, monogamy being developed from pologamy; Weber,<ref name=fx48_ve1_1665> ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 222. Weber's theory that ''[[सपत्न|sapatna]]'' cannot be derived from ''[[सपत्नी|sapatnī]]'' is, however, quite untenable.</ref> however, thinks that polygamy is secondary, a view that is supported by more recent anthropology.<ref name=fx49_ve1_1665> See, ''e.g.,'' Westermaarck, ''Origin and Development of Marriage;<br>'' Crawley, ''Mystic Rose.''</ref><br><br>''Polyandry.''--On the other hand, polyandry is not Vedic.<ref name=fx50_ve1_1665> Mayr, ''Indisches Erbrecht,'' Wien, 1873, contends in favour of its existence. But see Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 191, 207;<br> 10, 83, 84;<br> Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 48;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 354 ''et seq.;<br>'' von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 431, n. 2;<br> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 44, 340342;<br> Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 541-545.</ref> There is no passage containing any clear reference to such a custom. The most that can be said is that in the Rigveda<ref name=fx51_ve1_1665> x. 85, 37. 38.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx52_ve1_1665> Av. xiv. 1, 44. 52. 61;<br> 2, 14. 27.</ref> verses are occasionally found in which husbands are mentioned in relation to a single wife. It is difficult to be certain of the correct explanation of each separate instance of this mode of expression; but even if Weber's<ref name=fx53_ve1_1665> ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 191. So Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 326, who, however, suggests that the plural is generic.</ref> view, that the plural is here used ''majestatis causā,'' is not accepted, Delbrück's<ref name=fx54_ve1_1665> ''Op. cit.,'' 543.</ref> explanation by mythology is probably right. In other passages<ref name=fx55_ve1_1665> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 2, 14. ''Cf.'' the plural ''śvaśurāḥ,'' ‘fathers-in-law,’ in [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 12. The Niyoga has, of course, nothing to do with polyandry.</ref> the plural is simply generic.<br><br>''Marital Relations.''--Despite polygamy, however, there is ample evidence that the marriage tie was not, as Weber<ref name=fx56_ve1_1665> ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 83. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 5, 573, and ''cf.'' '''[[धर्म|Dharma]].'''</ref> has suggested, lightly regarded as far as the fidelity of the wife was concerned. There is, however, little trace of the husband's being expected to be faithful as a matter of morality. Several  passages,<ref name=fx57_ve1_1665> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 6, 8, 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 7.</ref> indeed, forbid, with reference to ritual abstinence, intercourse with the ''[[स्त्री|strī]]'' of another. This may imply that adultery on the husband's part was otherwise regarded as venial. But as the word ''[[स्त्री|strī]]'' includes all the ‘womenfolk,’ daughters and slaves, as well as wife, the conclusion can hardly be drawn that intercourse with another man's ‘wife’ was normally regarded with indifference.<ref name=fx58_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' above, p. 396.</ref> The curious ritual of the Varuṇapraghāsās,<ref name=fx59_ve1_1665> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 10, 11;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 2, 20;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 5, 2.</ref> in which the wife of the sacrificer is questioned as to her lovers, is shown by Delbrück<ref name=fx60_ve1_1665> ''Op. cit.,'' 550.</ref> to be a part of a rite meant to expiate unchastity on the part of a wife, not as a normal question for a sacrificer to put to his own wife. Again, Yājñavalkya's doctrine in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx61_ve1_1665> i. 3, 1, 21. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 76, n. 2;<br> Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v. paraḥpuṃsā'' (''cf.'' above, p. 397). Delbrück, ''op. cit.,'' 551, shows also that neither the Dīkṣā (‘consecration’) nor the [[प्रवर|Pravara]] (‘invitation’ to Agni, as described by the names of the mythical ancestors of the invoker) gives any countenance to the theory of doubt as to the parentage of the Vedic Indians.</ref> which seems to assert that no one cares if a wife is unchaste (''paraḥ-puṃsā'') or not, really means that no one cares if the wife is away from the men who are sacrificing, as the wives of the gods are apart from them during the particular rite in question. Monogamy is also evidently approved,<ref name=fx62_ve1_1665> Rv. i. 124, 7;<br> iv. 3, 2;<br> x. 71, 4, etc.</ref> so that some higher idea of morality was in course of formation. On the other hand, no Vedic text gives us the rule well known to other Indo-Germanic<ref name=fx63_ve1_1665> Leist, ''Altarisches Jus Gentium,'' 276 ''et seq. Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 388, 389;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 366, 367.</ref> peoples that the adulterer taken in the act can be killed with impunity, though the later legal literature has traces of this rule.<ref name=fx64_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' above, p. 396.</ref> There is also abundant evidence that the standard of ordinary sexual morality was not high.<br><br>''Hetairai.''--In the Rigveda<ref name=fx65_ve1_1665> Rv. i. 134, 3;<br> iii. 53, 8;<br> viii. 17, 7. ''[[महानग्नी|Mahānagnī]],'' Av. xiv. 1, 36;<br> xx. 136, 5;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 27, denotes a courtesan. ''Cf.'' Av. v. 7, 8. So also ''[[पुंश्चली|puṃścalī]],'' Av. xv. 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 22;<br> ''puṃścalū,'' Taittirīyā [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 15, 1.</ref> there are many references to illegitimate love and to the abandonment of the offspring of  such unions,<ref name=fx66_ve1_1665> Rv. ii. 29, 1 (''raha-sūḥ,'' ‘one who bears in secret.’ ''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 26;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 333, 334).</ref> especially in the case of a protégé of Indra, often mentioned as the ''parāvṛkta'' or ''[[परावृज्|parāvṛj]].''<ref name=fx67_ve1_1665> Rv. ii. 13, 12;<br> 15, 7;<br> iv. 19, 9;<br> 30, 16;<br> Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 335. The child, when exposed, was in danger of being consumed by ants ''(vamrī). Cf.'' below, p. 493.</ref> The ‘son of a maiden’ (''kumārī-[[पुत्र|putra]]'') is already spoken of in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx68_ve1_1665> xxx. 6.</ref> Such a person appears with a metronymic in the [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] period:<ref name=fx69_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' '''[[जाबाल|Jābāla]] [[सत्यकाम|Satyakāma]].'''</ref> this custom may be the origin of metronymics such as those which make up a great part of the lists of teachers (Vaṃśas) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx70_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' Pāṇini, iv. 1, 116. But the custom may be due simply to polygamy (Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' p. 244, n. 2).</ref> The Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx71_ve1_1665> xxiii. 30. 31: [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 19, 2. 3.</ref> refers to illicit unions of [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] and [[आर्य|Ārya]], both male and female, besides giving in its list of victims at the Puruṣamedha, or ‘human sacrifice,’ several whose designations apparently mean ‘courtesan’ (''atītvarī'')<ref name=fx72_ve1_1665> xxx. 15.</ref> and ‘procuress of abortion’ (''atiṣkadvarī''),<ref name=fx73_ve1_1665> xxx. 15;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 11, 1, has ''apaskadvarī.''</ref> while the ‘dyeing woman’ (''[[रजयित्री|rajayitrī]]'') is dedicated to sensuality.<ref name=fx74_ve1_1665> xxx. 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 7, 1.</ref> Pischel and Geldner also see many references to Hetairai in other passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx75_ve1_1665> ''Cf. Vedische Studien,'' 1, xxv, 196, 275, 299, 309;<br> 2, 120, 154, 179, etc.;<br> Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 48.</ref> especially where mention is made of Uṣas, the goddess of Dawn, who in their view is the characteristic Hetaira. At any rate, there is little doubt that the ‘dancer’ (''[[नृतू|nṛtū]]'') referred to in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx76_ve1_1665> i. 92, 4.</ref> was a Hetaira. When women are referred to as going to the '''[[समन|Samana]],''' or ‘place of meeting,’ Hetairai are probably also meant.<ref name=fx77_ve1_1665> Rv. iv. 58, 8;<br> vi. 75, 4;<br> x. 168, 2. Perhaps also ''vrā'' in i. 124, 8;<br> 126, 5.</ref> Grave cases of immorality are alluded to in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx78_ve1_1665> x. 162, 5 (brother and sister: ''cf.'' above, p. 397).</ref> The love of father and daughter, as shown in the myth of Prajāpati,<ref name=fx79_ve1_1665> Rv. x. 61, 5-7;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 2, 10;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 33;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 4, 1.</ref> is evidently censured, but the actual existence of this form of incest is recognized in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx80_ve1_1665> viii. 6, 7.</ref> Girls who had lost their  natural protectors--father or brother<ref name=fx81_ve1_1665> Rv. i. 124, 7. ''Cf.'' '''[[पुत्रिका|Putrikā]].'''</ref> --were apt to be reduced to live by immorality.<br><br>''Forms of Marriage.''--The state of society revealed in the Vedic age seems to point to considerable freedom on the part of both man and woman in selecting a wife or a husband. At any rate, it is not clear that either the father or the mother controlled the marriage of son or daughter of mature age,<ref name=fx82_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''op. cit.,'' 574. Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 309, asserts that the consent of parent or brother was needed, but no clear evidence of this can be adduced. The later custom is not conclusive, since it is bound up with the usage of child marriage, which deprived both son and daughter of anyfree choice. ''Cf. ibid.,'' 315;<br> Kaegi, ''Der Rigveda,'' 15.</ref> though no doubt the parents or parent often arranged a suitable match.<ref name=fx83_ve1_1665> This is so natural as not to need express evidence. ''Cf., e.g.,'' the marriage proposals of [[श्यावाश्व|Śyāvāśva]] [[आत्रेय|Ātreya]], as detailed in the Bṛhaddevatā, v. 49 ''et seq.;<br>'' Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 51 ''et seq.''</ref> The marriage was frequently arranged through an intermediary, the ‘wooer’ (''vara''),<ref name=fx84_ve1_1665> Rv. x. 78, 4;<br> 85, 15. 23. Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 310, exalts this into a universal practice, and compares the use of ''aryaman,'' ‘friend,’ as ‘bride-wooer.’ In Śyāvāśva's '''case,''' his father acted for him.</ref> presumably after those concerned had in effect come to an agreement. The sale of a daughter was not unknown,<ref name=fx85_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 10, 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 4, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 2, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xx. vi. 5. See also [[मानव|Mānava]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] Śāstra, iii. 53;<br> viii. 204;<br> ix. 98;<br> Megasthenes in McCrindle's translation, p. 70;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 407;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 345 ''et seq.;<br>'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 381;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 78 ''et seq.;<br>'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 86, n.;<br> Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 52.</ref> but a certain amount of discredit would seem to have attached to it,<ref name=fx86_ve1_1665> Rv. i. 109, 2, refers to the gods Indra and Agni as more generous than a ''[[विजामातृ|vijāmātṛ]],'' ‘son-in-law,’ or a ''[[स्याल|syāla]],'' ‘brother-in-law.’ The force of ''vi'' in the former word must be unfavourable, and the sense, as indicated by Pischel, is no doubt, that a son-in-law who was not in other respects altogether suitable might have to buy his bride at a heavy cost. The ''[[विजामातृ|vijāmātṛ]]'' is, in fact, the ''aśrīro jāmātā,'' the ‘ignoble son-in-law,’ of Rv. viii. 2, 20. ''Cf.'' [[यास्क|Yāska]], [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 9;<br> Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 255.</ref> and sons-in-law in such cases were sometimes stingy. On the other hand, dowries were not infrequently given, especially no doubt when damsels Suffered from bodily defects.<ref name=fx87_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' Rv. vi. 28, 5;<br> x. 27, 12;<br> Av. v. 17, 12. Possibly in Rv. i. 109, 2, there is a reference to a generous brother giving his sister a dowry in order to get her a husband. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 345;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 459;<br> Kaegi, ''Der Rigveda,'' n. 352;<br> Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 310, n. It is doubtful whether ''anudeyī'' in Rv. x. 85, 6, means ‘dowry’ or not. See Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 741.</ref> Occasionally marriages by  capture may have taken place, but only as knightly feats, as when '''[[विमद|Vimada]]''' carried off '''Purumitra's''' daughter against her father's wish, but very possibly with her own consent.<ref name=fx88_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 112, 19;<br> 116, 1;<br> 117, 20;<br> x. 39, 7;<br> 65, 12. Sāyaṇa's view that '''[[कमद्यू|Kamadyū]]''' was daughter of '''[[पुरुमित्र|Purumitra]]''' seems certain, though Zimmer, ''loc. cit.,'' is doubtful.</ref> The later law-books and the Epic describe in much detail various forms of marriage, but they all seem reducible to three types: (''a'') that which is based on mutual consent, the ''prājāpatya'' (‘connected with Prajāpati’); (''b'') that in which a price is paid for the bride, the ''āsura'' (‘Asura-like’), ''ārṣa'' (‘connected with the Ṛṣis’), ''brāhma'' (‘relating to Brahman’), or ''[[दैव|daiva]]'' (‘divine’); (''c'') those which consist in stealing the bride, the ''kṣātra'' (‘warrior-like’) or the ''rākṣasa'' (‘demon-like’) mode, of all of which traces are found in Vedic literature.<ref name=fx89_ve1_1665> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 361, 362;<br> Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 50 ''et seq.;<br>'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 29;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 383.</ref> For instance, the gift of a maiden for services rendered or other object is exemplified in the story of '''[[च्यवन|Cyavana]]''' in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx90_ve1_1665> iii. 122.</ref> and in that of '''[[श्यावाश्व|Śyāvāśva]]''' in the Bṛhaddevatā.<ref name=fx91_ve1_1665> v. 49 ''et seq.''</ref><br><br>''Wedding Ceremony.''--In normal marriages the bridal was celebrated by an elaborate ceremony which bears in essentials and details the strongest resemblance to the form observed by other Indo-Germanic as well as non-Indo-Germanic peoples,<ref name=fx92_ve1_1665> The older ritual is described with considerable detail in Rv. x. 85 and Av. xiv. 1 and 2. The later ritual, as elaborately traced in the [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] Sūtras, is set out by Weber and Haas, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 177-411. See also Leist, ''Altarisches Jus Gentium,'' 144 ''et seq.;<br>'' von Schroeder, ''Die Hochzeitsgebräuche der Esten,'' Berlin, 1888;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 384 ''et seq.;<br>'' Hopkins, ''op. cit.,'' 13, 355 ''et seq.;<br>'' Winternitz, ''Das altindische Hochzeitsrituell,'' 1892;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 739 ''et seq.;<br>'' Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 389 ''et seq.''</ref> and which was destined to secure the stability and fruitfulness of the union. The ceremony commenced at the bride's house,<ref name=fx93_ve1_1665> x. 17, 1.</ref> to which the bridegroom with his friends and relations repaired, and in which he met the friends and relations of the bride.<ref name=fx94_ve1_1665> Rv. iv. 58, 9;<br> Av. vi. 60;<br> xiv. 2, 59.</ref> A cow or cows were slain for the entertainment of the guests.<ref name=fx95_ve1_1665> Rv. x. 85, 13.</ref> The bridegroom having caused the bride to mount a stone, formally grasped her hand, and led her round the household  fire.<ref name=fx96_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' Rv. x. 85, 36. 38;<br> Av. xiv. 1, 47. 48. Before the bride mounted the stone, the groom repeated, according to the [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] Sūtras (Āśvalāyana, i. 7. 3;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]], i. 13, 4;<br> Pāraskara, i. 6, 3, etc.), the words, ‘I am he, thou art she;<br> I the Sāman, thou the Ṛc;<br> I the heaven, thou the earth;<br> here will we unite ourselves and produce offspring,’ for which see Av. xiv. 2, 71;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxv. 18;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 27;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 19 (Mādhyaṃdina).</ref> This act constituted the marriage, the husband hence being called ‘he who takes by the hand’ (''[[हस्त|hasta]]-[[ग्राभ|grābha]]'').<ref name=fx97_ve1_1665> x. 18, 8. ''Cf.'' Av. xiv. 1, 51.</ref> The festivities being over,<ref name=fx98_ve1_1665> Av. xiv. 2, 59 ''et seq.''</ref> the bridegroom took the bride to his home on a car in a marriage procession,<ref name=fx99_ve1_1665> Rv. x. 85, 7. 8. 10. 24, 25. 26. 27. 42 ''et seq.;<br>'' Av. xiv. 1, 60.</ref> all to the accompaniment of suitable stanzas. Then followed cohabitation.<ref name=fx100_ve1_1665> See for the purification of the bride's garment, Rv. x. 85. 28-30. 35.</ref><br><br>''Wife's Property and Status.''--We have very little information as to the legal relations of wife and husband after marriage. It may be assumed that the husband appropriated the wife's dowry, if any, as well as her earnings, if any: even in the Epic<ref name=fx101_ve1_1665> ‘They own neither themselves nor an inheritance’ (''nātmanaś caneśate na dāyasyed''), says the Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 4, 2, 13. ''Cf.'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 6, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 8, 2;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 4. ''Cf.'' for the Epic, Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 368. For compulsory obedience of the wife, ''cf.'' Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 7. In the same Upanīṣad [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]], on retiring from the ordinary life, divides his goods between his two wives.</ref> the rise of the recognition of women's property as their own (''[[स्त्री|strī]]-[[धन|dhana]]'') is only slow. That the husband was absolute master of a wife as of a slave is not probable, though he doubtless exercised the same power of correction as was expressly allowed in the eighteenth century by English law. The poetical ideal<ref name=fx102_ve1_1665> Rv. viii. 31, 5-9;<br> x. 34, 11;<br> 85, 18. 19. 42 ''et seq.;<br>'' Av. iii. 30;<br> xiv. 2, 32.</ref> of the family was decidedly high, and we have no reason to doubt that it was often actually fulfilled. Moreover, the wife on her marriage was at once given an honoured position in the house; she is emphatically mistress in her husband's home, exercising authority over her fatherin-law, her husband's brothers, and her unmarried sisters.<ref name=fx103_ve1_1665> Rv. x. 85, 46. ''Cf.'' as regards the bridegroom's sisters, [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 37. In Av. xiv. 2, 26, the daughter-in-law is to be ‘wealful’ (''śambhūḥ'') to her father-in-law, and ‘pleasant’ (''syonā'') to her mother-in-law, which is correct on either theory of her position as a daughter or a mistress.</ref> No doubt the case contemplated is one in which the eldest son  of a family has become its head owing to the decrepitude<ref name=fx104_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 70, 5, where an old fatḥer's goods are divided by his sons, and Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 327. ''Cf.'' also the possible case of a father who recovers after giving over all his goods to his son, [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 15.</ref> of the parents, his wife then taking the place of the mistress of the joint family while the brothers and sisters are still unmarried. It is not inconsistent with the great stress elsewhere<ref name=fx105_ve1_1665> Av. viii. 6, 24;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 12 (''Indische Studien,'' 5, 260);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 6, 12;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 22;<br> Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 514, 515.</ref> laid on the respect due to a father-in-law, who then is probably regarded as still in full possession of his faculties, and controls the house while his son continues to live with him. The respect would no doubt equally apply if the son had set up a separate family of his own.<ref name=fx106_ve1_1665> No doubt it might also apply even if the father-in-law were decrepit;<br> but it is hardly likely that, in these circumstances, the strong sense of respect evident in Av. viii. 6, 24, which implies fear, would have developed.</ref><br><br>Moreover, the wife was a regular participator in the offerings of the husband. In this connexion the term '''[[पत्नी|Patnī]]''' regularly applies to her in the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx107_ve1_1665> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 9, 2, 14;<br> Pāṇini, iv. 1, 33;<br> Delbrück, ''op. cit.,'' 510, 512.</ref> where '''[[जाया|Jāyā]]''' designates her in her conjugal capacity, not in that of sharer in the sacrifice. In this respect her position gradually deteriorated: thus the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx108_ve1_1665> i. 1, 4, 13. For the older practice, ''cf.'' Rv. i. 122, 2;<br> iii. 53, 4-6;<br> viii. 31, 5 ''et seq.;<br>'' x. 86, 10, etc.</ref> describes a certain ceremony in which the wife (''[[जाया|jāyā]]'') alone offered the oblation in former times, while later a priest might do so instead. The same [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] shows other traces of a lowering in the position of women, probably due to the growing sense of the importance of ceremonial priority.<ref name=fx109_ve1_1665> ''E.g.,'' i. 3, 1, 9. 12. 13. ''Cf.'' Lévi, ''La doctrine du sacrifice,'' 157, 158.</ref> So in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx110_ve1_1665> iii. 6, 3.</ref> women generally are classed with dice and drink as three chief evils, and woman is declared to be ‘untruth,’<ref name=fx111_ve1_1665> i. 10, 11.</ref> and connected with Nirṛti, ‘calamity.’<ref name=fx112_ve1_1665> ''Ibid.''</ref> A woman too, according to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx113_ve1_1665> vi. 5, 8, 2. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 1, 9.</ref> is inferior even to a bad man, and a sarcastic reference is made in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx114_ve1_1665> xxxi. 1. ''Cf.'' Aitareva Brāhmana, iii. 22.</ref> to her power of  getting things from her husband by cajolery at night. On the other hand must be set the encomia on woman: a woman is half her husband,<ref name=fx115_ve1_1665> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2, 1, 10.</ref> and completes him;<ref name=fx116_ve1_1665> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 4, 17.</ref> and in the Rigveda<ref name=fx117_ve1_1665> In viii. 33, 17, Indra is credited with a poor opinion of woman's intelligence, and [[पुरूरवस्|Purūravas]] in x. 95, 15, frankly calls them hyenas. They are defended in v. 61, 6-8, but only against mean men ('''[[पणि|Paṇi]]'''). ''Cf.'' Kaegi, ''Der Rigveda,'' n. 351.</ref> attacks on women mingle with the general assumption of their good qualities. None the less, the Brāhmaṇas clearly indicate a gradual decline in their position, which is evident from the rule that requires the wife to eat after her husband.<ref name=fx118_ve1_1665> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 9, 2, 12;<br> x. 5, 2, 9. ''Cf.'' [[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 13;<br> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 1, 2, 2;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 330, n.;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 365, n.</ref> Scolds were also known: the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx119_ve1_1665> iii. 24, 7. ''Cf.'' Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 3, 22;<br> Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 14, n. 2.</ref> praises the wife ‘who does not answer back’ (''aprativādinī''). Women bore no part in political life: men go to the assembly, not women, the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx120_ve1_1665> iv. 7, 4. ''Cf.'' Av. vii. 38, 4.</ref> expressly says. On the other hand, with the advance of education, women shared in the intellectual interests of the day, as is exemplified by Yājñavalkya's<ref name=fx121_ve1_1665> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 4, 1;<br> iv. 5, 1.</ref> two wives, of whom one was interested in his philosophical discussions, the other not. Other women are also referred to in the Upaniṣads as teachers, but whether they were married is not certain.<ref name=fx122_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' the epithet ''gandharva-gṛhitā,'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 29;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 9;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 3, 1;<br> 7, 1;<br> and see Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]. iii. 4, 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 10.</ref><br><br>But the main object of a woman's marriage was the production of children, this being repeatedly asserted in the Rigveda and later.<ref name=fx123_ve1_1665> Rv. i. 91, 20;<br> 92, 13;<br> iii. 1, 23;<br> x. 85, 25. 41. 42. 45;<br> Av. iii. 23, 2;<br> v. 25, 11;<br> vi. 11, 2, etc.</ref> The desire for offspring, as was natural in a society which mainly counted relationship through the father, took the form of a wish for a son to perform the necessary funeral rites for the father, and to continue his line. It was no doubt possible to adopt a son, but in the Rigveda<ref name=fx124_ve1_1665> vii. 4, 7. 8. ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 2.</ref> this custom is plainly viewed as unsatisfactory. The practice  is recognized,<ref name=fx125_ve1_1665> x. 18, 8;<br> 40, 2.</ref> as we have seen above of Niyoga, in the appointment of a brother to beget children with the wife of a dead man, or perhaps of a man who is childless. ‘Sonlessness’ (''avīratā'') is placed on the same level as lack of property (''amati''), and Agni is besought to protect from it.<ref name=fx126_ve1_1665> Rv. iii. 16, 5.</ref> The birth of a daughter was certainly not specially welcome: the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx127_ve1_1665> vi. 11, 3. ''Cf.'' viii. 6, 25.</ref> in one hymn distinctly invokes the birth of a son, and deprecates that of a daughter, while the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx128_ve1_1665> vii. 15. ''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 409.</ref> contains an old verse which says that a daughter is a misery (''kṛpaṇam''), while a son is a light in the highest heaven (''jyotir ha putraḥ parame vyoman''). But there is no proof that the Vedic Indians practised the exposure of female children. This conclusion, deduced from certain passages in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx129_ve1_1665> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 10, 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 6, 4;<br> 7, 9;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxvii. 9;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 17, 12.</ref> by Zimmer<ref name=fx130_ve1_1665> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 319. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 314, n., who cites [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 8, 8, as evidence of the exposure of two boys, but the sense is doubtful.</ref> and Delbrück,<ref name=fx131_ve1_1665> ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 575. See also Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 54, 210;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 6, 142;<br> Kaegi, ''Der Rigveda,'' n. 49;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 389, 390. Bo7htlingk's view is given in ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 44, 494-496, and ''cf.'' Pischel, ''Vedisehe Studien,'' 2, 48, who compares iv. 18, 5.</ref> has been disproved by Bo7htlingk.<br><br>''Child Life.''--No doubt the care of a child was left to the mother, but we learn little from the earlier literature<ref name=fx132_ve1_1665> The later literature is full of details of the ceremonies before and after birth (see Delbrück, ''op. cit.,'' 573 ''et seq.''). Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 314, n., gives the Vedic embryology;<br> twins were disliked, [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 9, etc.</ref> of the life of the young. The length of the period of pregnancy is frequently placed at ten (doubtless lunar) months.<ref name=fx133_ve1_1665> Rv. v. 78, 9;<br> x. 184, 3;<br> Av. i. 11, 6;<br> iii. 23, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 13, 9;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 5. 2, 4;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 9. 1;<br> Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 314, n. There are in the Av. many spells concerned with birth (i. 11, etc.), and miscarriages are mentioned (''avatokā, avasū,'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 15;<br> Av. viii. 6, 9, etc.).</ref> On birth the child was first fed with milk or ghee, and then given the breast.<ref name=fx134_ve1_1665> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 3, 4 (Mādhyaṃdina = i. 5, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]). ''Cf.'' also vi. 4, 24 ''et seq.;<br>'' Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 1, 6. After being weaned the child is ''ati-stana'' (Kauṣitaki [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 2).</ref> On the eighth day after birth  the infant was washed.<ref name=fx135_ve1_1665> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 7, 2 (on [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]], ii. 525 = Rv. ix. 96, 17). The first ten days were the dangerous period ([[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 14;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxii. 14, 3).</ref> The cutting of the teeth was also a solemn occasion,<ref name=fx136_ve1_1665> Av. vi. 140.</ref> and is the subject of a hymn in the Atharvaveda. Reference is also made to children's learning to speak, which the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx137_ve1_1665> vi. 1, 6, 7. ''Cf.'' Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 4, 2, 38;<br> xi. 1, 6, 3 5.</ref> ascribes to the end of the first year of life. The [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx138_ve1_1665> i. 3, 3.</ref> asserts that the words '''Tata''' and '''[[तात|Tāta]],''' onomatopoetic words like ‘dada,’<ref name=fx139_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''op. cit.,'' 449, 596.</ref> are the first words of a child's speech, giving therein perhaps an unfair prominence to the father. The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx140_ve1_1665> vi. 68, ''Cf.'' ii. 13, according to [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 53. 54, and ''cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 4, 1, 6.</ref> further contains at least one hymn for the ceremony of the first shaving of the young man's beard. The giving of a name was also an occasion of importance, a second one being often added.<ref name=fx141_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 3, 3, with Keith's note;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 1, 3, 9, and '''[[नामन्|Nāman]].'''</ref><br><br>''Satī.''--On the death of her husband, in some cases the widow burned herself or was burned by his relations.<ref name=fx142_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 391;<br> von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 41;<br> Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 67-69;<br> Weber, ''Proceedings of the Berlin Academy,'' 1896, 254 ''et seq.;<br>'' Roth, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 8, 468;<br> Wilson, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 16, 202;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 329;<br> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Kommentar,'' 154.</ref> This is clearly implied in the reference to this ancient custom in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx143_ve1_1665> Av. xviii. 3, 1.</ref> On the other hand, the Rigveda does not contemplate the custom anywhere, but on the contrary considers the widow as married apparently to the brother of the dead man.<ref name=fx144_ve1_1665> x. 18, 7. 8.</ref> The custom of Suttee would therefore appear buring the Vedic age to have been in abeyance, at least as a general rule. At all times the practice seems to have been mainly usual among families of the warrior class, to judge from the other Indo-Germanic parallels.<ref name=fx145_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' Herodotos, v. 5 (of the Thracians);<br> iv. 71 (of the Scythians);<br> Procopius, ''De Bello Gothico,'' ii. 14 (of the Heruli). So in Germany Brynhild and Nanna are instances (''cf.'' Weinhold, ''Altnordisches Leben,'' 476 ''et seq.''). The universality of the custom must not be exaggerated, as Zimmer, 331, is inclined to do. To burn all the wives of a king would, in primitive ages, have been a wasteful action;<br> even the chief wife would often have had to be spared on one ground or another. The Rigveda already reveals a state of society in which the actual burning of the wife was avoided by a semblance of it in the funeral ritual of (''cf.'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 126). The reward of a good wife was to go to the world of her husband (''pati-loka'') after death (''cf.'' Av. xiv. 1, 64;<br> xviii. 3, 1;<br> Rv. x. 85, 43). A Vedic citation in the scholiast on Pāṇini, iii. 2, 8, Vārttika, 2, says that a Brahmin woman who drinks '''[[सुरा|Surā]],''' an intoxicating liquor, does not go to the world of her husband after death.</ref> In other classes  the survival of wives was more necessary, and the remarriage of widows, whether prohibited or allowed in the texts, is proof that there were widows who could be remarried.<ref name=fx146_ve1_1665> ''Cf.'' perhaps the ''gartāruh'' of Rv. i. 124, 7, as explained by [[यास्क|Yāska]], [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 5;<br> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Kommentar,'' 22.</ref>

पत्ति
<u>'''Patti'''</u> is used in the Atharvaveda (vii. 62, 1) to designate the ‘foot soldier’ in war as opposed to the '''[[रथिन्|Rathin]],''' ‘charioteer,’ the latter defeating (''ji'') the former. One of the epithets of Rudra in the [[शतरुद्रिय|Śatarudriya]] liturgy of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā (xvi. 19) is ‘lord of footmen’ (''pattīnāṃ pati'').<br>==Foot Notes==

पत्नी
<u>'''Patnī.'''</u> See '''Pati.''' A part of the house is the ''Patnīnāṃ [[सदन|Sadana]],'' mentioned in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1667> ix. 3, 7.</ref> presumably the women's quarters. The phrase is borrowed from the ''Patnīśāla,'' ‘hut for the wife,’ of the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1667> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 18;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 6, 9, 8;<br> x. 2, 3, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 22 (''-[[शाला|śālā]]'');<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xix. 6, etc.</ref> ritual.

पथिन् सौभर
<u>'''Pathin Saubhara'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[सोभरि|Sobhari]]'''’) is mentioned in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1668> ii. 5, 22 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> iv. 5, 28 (Mādhyaṃdina = iv. 6, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> as the pupil of '''[[अयास्य आङ्गिरस|Ayāsya Āṅgirasa]].'''

पथि-कृत्
<u>'''Pathi-kṛt,'''</u> ‘path-maker,’ is not a rare epithet in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1669> ii. 23, 6;<br> vi. 21, 12;<br> ix. 106, 5;<br> x. 14, 15;<br> 111, 3, etc.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1669> Av. xviii. 2, 53;<br> 3, 25, etc.</ref> showing clearly the importance naturally attached in primitive times to the finding of roads. The frequency  with which the epithet is applied to Agni<ref name=fx3_ve1_1669> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 1, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 1, 5, 5;<br> xii. 4, 4, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 3, etc.</ref> suggests that there is here an allusion to fire burning the primæval forest and rendering advance possible. The god Pūṣan is ''[[पथि-कृत्|pathi-kṛt]],'' as guarding the flocks.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1669> Sāṅkhāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 9;<br> xvi. 1, 17. The [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 1, 18, explains ''[[पथि-कृत्|pathi-kṛt]]'' merely as ''adhipati,'' ‘lord’;<br> but the sense must be more pregnant than that.</ref> The [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]],<ref name=fx5_ve1_1669> Rv. x. 14, 15, where the expression refers to their finding the way to the heavenly world;<br> but it is probably a transfer of an epithet of terrestrial application.</ref> or seers, as ‘path-makers,’ may be compared with the Roman Pontifices.

पद्
<u>'''Pad'''</u> in the Atharvaveda (xix. 6, 2) and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xi. 3, 2, 3) denotes a ‘quarter.’ This sense is derived from the primary meaning of ‘foot,’ which as applied to quadrupeds would represent ‘one-fourth.’ ''Cf.'' '''[[पाद|Pāda]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

पद
<u>'''Pada'''</u> in the sense of ‘quarter of a stanza’ is found as early as the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1671> i. 164, 24. 45.</ref> and often later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1671> Av. ix. 10, 19;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 25;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6. 10. 17, etc.;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxii. 1. 5.</ref> In the Brāhmaṇas it also denotes a ‘word’ as opposed to a ‘letter’ ('''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]]''').<ref name=fx3_ve1_1671> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxvi. 5, where the sequence is half-stanza (''ardharca''), quarter-stanza (''[[पाद|pāda]]''), word (''pada''), and letter ''([[वर्ण|varṇa]]). Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 2, 6, 13;<br> xi. 5, 6, 9, etc.</ref>

पदि
<u>'''Padi'''</u> is found once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1672> i. 125, 2.</ref> where, according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, the word probably designates some kind of animal. [[यास्क|Yāska]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1672> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 18.</ref> explains it as equivalent to ''gantu,'' ‘a moving creature,’ but [[दुर्ग|Durga]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1672> In his commentary on [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> as meaning ‘bird.’ The passage may refer to catching the Padi in a net (''? [[मुक्षीजा|mukṣījā]]'').<ref name=fx4_ve1_1672> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 129;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 244.</ref>

पयस्
<u>'''Payas'''</u> denotes the ‘milk’ of the cow in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1673> i. 164, 28;<br> ii. 14, 10;<br> iv. 3, 9;<br> v. 85, 2;<br> x. 30, 13;<br> 63, 3, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1673> Av. iv. 11, 4;<br> xii. 1, 10;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iv. 3. ''Cf.'' '''Go''' and '''[[क्षीर|Kṣīra]].'''</ref> More generally it has also the sense of ‘sap’ or ‘fluid’  found in plants,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1673> Av. iii. 5, 1;<br> x. 1, 12;<br> xiii. 1, 9;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvii. 1;<br> xviii. 36, etc. So of Soma, Rv. ix. 97, 14.</ref> and giving them life and strength. In other passages it denotes the ‘water’ of heaven.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1673> Rv. i. 64, 5;<br> 166, 3;<br> iii. 33, 1. 4;<br> iv. 57, 8, etc.</ref> A vow to live for a time on milk alone occurs in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx5_ve1_1673> ''Payo-[[व्रत|vrata]],'' ‘one who undergoes a vow (to subsist) on (nothing but) milk,’ ix. 5, 1, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 9. The Dīkṣita subsists on it alone.</ref>

पयस्या
<u>'''Payasyā'''</u> in the later Saṃhitās and Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve1_1674> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 13, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 11, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 22. 24;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 4, 10. 21;<br> 5, 1, 12;<br> 2, 9, etc.</ref> denotes curds, said to consist of a mixture of sour milk and hot or cold fresh milk.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1674> See Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 381, n. 2.</ref>

पर आट्णार
<u>'''Para Āṭṇāra'''</u> (‘descendant of Aṭṇāra’) appears in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_1675> Taittīrīya Saṃhitā, v. 6, 5, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxii. 3 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 473).</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve1_1675> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 16, 3;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 11.</ref> as one of the ancient great kings who won sons by performing a particular sacrifice. In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1675> xiii. 5, 4, 4.</ref> he is styled [[हैरण्यनाभ|Hairaṇyanābha]], ‘descendant of [[हिरण्यनाभ|Hiraṇyanābha]],’ and in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_1675> xvi. 9, 11.</ref> he is called Para Āhlāra [[वैदेह|Vaideha]], a fact testifying to the close connexion of '''[[कोसल|Kosala]]''' and '''[[विदेह|Videha]].''' A '''[[यज्ञ-गाथा|Yajña-gāthā]],''' or ‘sacrificial verse,’ there<ref name=fx5_ve1_1675> ''Ibid.,'' 13. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 7;<br> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 7;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 165, n. 4.</ref> cited mentions '''[[हिरण्यनाभ|Hiraṇyanābha]] [[कौसल्य|Kausalya]]''' in connexion with Para.

परम-ज्या
<u>'''Parama-jyā,'''</u> ‘of supreme power,’ is understood by Ludwig<ref name=fx1_ve1_1676> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 159.</ref> in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1676> viii. 1, 30.</ref> as the proper name of a great man among the '''Yadus.''' But it is doubtful whether the word is more than an epithet.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1676> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 39.</ref> 

परशु
<u>'''Paraśu'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1677> i. 127, 3;<br> vii. 104, 21;<br> x. 28, 8;<br> 53, 9, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1677> Av. iii. 19, 4;<br> vii. 28, 1;<br> xi. 9, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 10;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 6, 4, 10;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 35;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 11, etc.</ref> denotes the axe of the woodcutter. Of its form we know nothing. A red-hot axe was used in a form of ordeal ('''[[दिव्य|Divya]]''') applied in accusations of theft.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1677> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 16, 1.</ref> See also '''[[पर्शु|Parśu]].'''

परश्वन्
<u>'''Paraśvan.'''</u> See '''[[परस्वन्त्|Parasvant]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

परस्वन्त्
<u>'''Parasvant'''</u> denotes a large wild animal which Roth<ref name=fx1_ve1_1679> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> conjectures to be the wild ass. It is mentioned in the Vṛṣākapi hymn<ref name=fx2_ve1_1679> x. 86, 18.</ref> of the Rigveda, twice in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1679> vi. 72, 2;<br> xx. 131, 22.</ref> and in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1679> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 10;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 8;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 21, 1, where the commentator takes it to be the wild buffalo.</ref> in all of which passages the sense of ‘wild ass’ is satisfactory. More doubtful is the meaning of the word ''paraśvā(n)'' in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx5_ve1_1679> i. 2.</ref> where the commentary explains it as ‘serpent.’ It is, of course, quite possible that the word has nothing to do with ''[[परस्वन्त्|parasvant]].'' Bühler<ref name=fx6_ve1_1679> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 63;<br> Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 17, n. 1;<br> ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 377, n. 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 2, 633;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 86, 87;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 335;<br> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 105.</ref> suggests connexion with the Pāli ''palāsāda,'' ‘rhinoceros.’

परा-वृज्
<u>'''Parā-vṛj'''</u> is a term found in four passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1680> i. 112, 8;<br> ii. 13, 12;<br> 15, 7;<br> x. 61, 8.</ref> in all of which it refers to a person in a forlorn condition, while one<ref name=fx2_ve1_1680> x. 61, 8.</ref> of them also speaks of him as going south. Sāyaṇa's<ref name=fx3_ve1_1680> On i. 112, 8, etc., ''of.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' 152.</ref> view that the word is a proper name is most unlikely, while Grassmann's<ref name=fx4_ve1_1680> Translation of the Rigveda, 1, 23, and ''cf. Wo7rterbuch, s.v.''</ref> explanation of it as ‘cripple’ is still less probable.  Roth's<ref name=fx5_ve1_1680> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> interpretation of it as ‘exile’ seems clearly right in the passage which refers to the [[परावृज्|Parāvṛj]] as going south. Zimmer<ref name=fx6_ve1_1680> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 185, 334, 335.</ref> accepts Roth's view for this passage, but in the others sees a reference to the child of a maiden exposed by her and in danger of being eaten by insects (''vamrī''). This view is supported by the fact that ''parāvṛkta'' seems to have the same sense,<ref name=fx7_ve1_1680> Rv. iv. 30, 19. ''Cf.'' iv. 30, 16;<br> 19, 9.</ref> and is accepted by Oldenberg.<ref name=fx8_ve1_1680> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 200. ''Cf.'' above, p. 481, n. 67.<br><br>''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 248;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 402.</ref>

पराशर
<u>'''Parāśara'''</u> is mentioned with '''[[शतयातु|Śatayātu]]''' and '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]]''' in the Rigvedic hymn celebrating '''Sudās''''<ref name=fx1_ve1_1681> vii. 18, 21.</ref> victory over the ten kings. According to the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1681> vi. 30.</ref> he was a son of [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]], but the Epic version makes him a son of '''[[शक्ति|Śakti]]''' and grandson of [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]]. Geldner<ref name=fx3_ve1_1681> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 132.</ref> thinks that he is mentioned in the Rigveda along with [[शतयातु|Śatayātu]], perhaps his uncle, and his grandfather [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]], as the three sages who approached Indra and won his favour for [[सुदास्|Sudās]]. He is erroneously credited with the authorship of certain hymns of the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_1681> i. 65-73.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 110, 111;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 324. The Parāśaras as a school appear in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Anukramaṇī (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 460).</ref> by the Anukramaṇī (Index).

परि-क्षित्
<u>'''Pari-kṣit'''</u> appears in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1682> xx. 127, 7-10. See also Scheftelowitz, ''Die Apokryphen des Veda,'' 156, 157, and the verses in the Vaitāna [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxxiv. 9. The Vedic spelling is [[परिक्षित्|Parikṣit]], not Parīkṣit.</ref> as a king in whose realm, that of the Kurus, prosperity and peace abound. The verses in which he is celebrated are later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1682> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 32, 10;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxx. 5;<br> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 12;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 17.</ref> called ''Pārikṣityaḥ,'' and the Brāhmaṇas explain that Agni is ''[[परि-क्षित्|pari-kṣit]]'' because he dwells among men. Hence Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_1682> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> and Bloomfield<ref name=fx4_ve1_1682> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 690, 691. but see ''Atharvaveda,'' 101, n. 9.</ref> regard [[परिक्षित्|Parikṣit]] in the Atharvaveda not as a human king at all. This may be correct, but it is not certain. Both Zimmer<ref name=fx5_ve1_1682> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 131.</ref> and  Oldenberg<ref name=fx6_ve1_1682> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 237;<br> ''Buddha,'' 396.</ref> recognize [[परिक्षित्|Parikṣit]] as a real king, a view supported by the fact that in the later Vedic literature King '''[[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]]''' bears the patronymic '''[[पारिक्षित|Pārikṣita]].''' If this be so, [[परिक्षित्|Parikṣit]] belonged to the later period, since the [[अथर्वन्|Atharvan]] passage in which his name occurs is certainly late, and none of the other Saṃhitās know [[परिक्षित्|Parikṣit]] at all. The Epic<ref name=fx7_ve1_1682> See Zimmer, ''loc. cit.''</ref> makes him grandfather of Pratiśravas and great-grandfather of Pratīpa, and Zimmer,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1682/> probably with justice, compares the [[प्रातिसुत्वन|Prātisutvana]] and Pratīpa found in another late [[अथर्वन्|Atharvan]] passage.<ref name=fx8_ve1_1682> xx. 129.</ref> But '''Devāpi''' and '''Śantanu''' cannot be brought into connexion with Pratīpa.<ref name=fx9_ve1_1682> Devāpi is really a Brahmin, son of [[ऋष्टिषेण|Ṛṣṭiṣeṇa]], and not connected directly with Śantanu. [[यास्क|Yāska]], [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 10, identifies them as brothers and Kurus;<br> but the former part of the identification is, no doubt, wrong.</ref>

परि-घ
<u>'''Pari-gha'''</u> denotes an iron bolt or bar in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (ii. 24, 6. 10. 15) as often later.<br>==Foot Notes==

परि-चक्रा
<u>'''Pari-cakrā'''</u> is according to one reading the name of a '''[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]]''' town mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1684> xiii. 5, 4, 7.</ref> and identified by Weber<ref name=fx2_ve1_1684> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 192.</ref> with the later Ekacakrā, which was near '''[[काम्पील|Kāmpīla]].'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1684> Mahābhārata, i. 6094.</ref> There is a various reading [[परिवक्रा|Parivakrā]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_1684> Accepted by the scholiast and Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 397.</ref>

परि-चर
<u>'''Pari-cara'''</u> is found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1685> iv. 3, 5, 9. ''Cf. pari-caritṛ,'' Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vii. 8, 1.</ref> in the sense of ‘attendant.’ In the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1685> vi. 11;<br> Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 457.</ref> ''pari-caraṇa'' has the same sense metaphorically, the other two Vedas (Sāma and Yajur) being said to be subsidiary to the Rigveda.

परि-चर्मण्य
<u>'''Pari-carmaṇya'''</u> denotes a thong of leather in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vi. 12) and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka (ii. 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

परि-तक्म्या
<u>'''Pari-takmyā'''</u> in a number of passages of the '''Rigveda'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_1687> i. 116, 15;<br> iv. 41, 6;<br> 43, 3;<br> v. 30, 13;<br> 31, 11;<br> vi. 24, 9;<br> vii. 69, 4.</ref> denotes ‘night’ according to the St. Petersburg '''Dictionary.'''  Sieg<ref name=fx2_ve1_1687> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 128. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 36;<br> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 106.</ref> thinks that in one place<ref name=fx3_ve1_1687> i. 116, 15.</ref> at least the word signifies the decisive point of the race, something like the sense of '''[[प्रपित्व|Prapitva]].''' But this is very doubtful.

परि-दा
<u>'''Pari-dā'''</u> in a few passages of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1688> ii. 4, 1, 11;<br> ix. 2, 1, 17;<br> 4, 2, 17;<br> 4, 5;<br> 5, 1, 53.</ref> has the sense of ‘giving oneself up to the mercy or protection of another.’

परि-धान
<u>'''Pari-dhāna'''</u> denotes ‘garment,’ probably ‘under garment,’ in the Atharvaveda (viii. 2, 16) and the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 1, 10). A garment of saffron is mentioned in the Śānkhāyana Āraṇyaka (xi. 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

परि-पद्
<u>'''Pari-pad'''</u> seems in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1690> x. 28, 10;<br> metaphorically, viii. 24, 24.</ref> to denote a pitfall used to capture lions.

परि-पन्थिन्
<u>'''Pari-panthin,'''</u> ‘besetting the path,’ denotes ‘robber’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1691> i. 42, 3;<br> 103, 6;<br> x. 85, 32.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1691> Av. i. 27, 1;<br> iii. 15, 1;<br> xii. 1, 32;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iv. 34, etc.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[तस्कर|Taskara]], [[तायु|Tāyu]], [[स्तेन|Stena]].'''

परि-पवन
<u>'''Pari-pavana'''</u> signifies in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (iv. 9. 10) an instrument for winnowing grain.<br>==Foot Notes==

परि-मित्
<u>'''Pari-mit'''</u> occurs once in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1693> ix. 3, 1.</ref> in the description of a house, meaning perhaps the ‘crossbeams’ connecting the vertical posts.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1693> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 596;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 158;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 525.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[गृह|Gṛha]].'''

परि-मोष
<u>'''Pari-moṣa'''</u> in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1694> ii. 5, 5, 1;<br> vi. 1, 11, 5.</ref> signifies ‘theft,’ and ''parimoṣin'' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1694> xi. 6, 3, 11;<br> xiii. 2, 4, 2, etc.</ref> ‘thief.’ 

परि-रथ्य
<u>'''Pari-rathya'''</u> occurs once in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1695> viii. 8, 22.</ref> meaning either ‘road’<ref name=fx2_ve1_1695> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 587, following Nīlakaṇṭha's explanation of ''[[परिरथ्य|parirathya]],'' Mahābhārata, viii. 1487.</ref> or a part of the chariot, perhaps as Ludwig<ref name=fx3_ve1_1695> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 528.</ref> and Whitney<ref name=fx4_ve1_1695> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 506.</ref> render it, the ‘rim.’

परि-वक्रा
<u>'''Pari-vakrā'''</u> is the reading accepted in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 5, 4, 7) by the scholiast instead of the variant '''[[परिचक्रा|Paricakrā]],''' which is supported by the Epic Ekacakrā.<br>==Foot Notes==

परि-वत्सर
<u>'''Pari-vatsara'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1697> x. 62, 2.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1697> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] i. 5, 5, 6;<br> Mahābhārata, i. 3202, etc. So ''parivatsarīṇa,'' as an adjective, ‘relating to a full year,’ Rv. vii. 103, 8;<br> Av. iii. 10, 3.</ref> a ‘full year.’ It is often mentioned with other names of year (see '''[[संवत्सर|Saṃvatsara]]'''), and in the later five year cycle counts as the second year.

परि-वाप
<u>'''Pari-vāpa'''</u> in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_1698> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 10, 1;<br> vi. 5, 11, 4;<br> vii. 2, 10, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 11;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 21. 22.</ref> and Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve1_1698> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 24;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 11, 2, etc.</ref> denotes ‘fried grains of rice.’

परि-वित्त
<u>'''Pari-vitta'''</u> denotes an ‘elder brother who is not married when his younger brother is.’ The term occurs in the list of sinful persons in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_1699> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxi. 7;<br> Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitā, xlvii. 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 8, 11;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 9.</ref> as well as in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1699> vi. 112, 3.</ref> where Ludwig<ref name=fx3_ve1_1699> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 470.</ref> needlessly proposes to read ''parivettā,'' the ‘younger brother who marries before his eldest brother.’ The name for the younger brother in the older texts is Parivividāna.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1699> So in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]], Kapiṣṭhala, Maitrāyaṇī, and Vājasaneyi Saṃhitās, ''loc. cit.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 580 ''et seq.;<br>'' Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Phīlology,'' 17, 430 ''et seq.;<br> Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 522 ''et seq.;<br>'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 315;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 362.</ref> 

परि-वृक्ता
<u>'''Pari-vṛktā, Pari-vṛktī, Pari-vṛttī,'''</u> are variant forms of the name of the rejected one among the royal wives. See '''Pati.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

परि-वेष्टृ
<u>'''Pari-veṣṭṛ'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1701> ix. 6, 51.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1701> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 3, 1, 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 2, 16;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vi. 13;<br> xxx. 12. 13;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 8, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 21;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 6;<br> iii. 8, 2, 3;<br> vi. 2, 13, 3, etc.</ref> denotes an ‘attendant,’ more especially one who serves up food, a ‘waiter.’ The feminine form Pariveṣṭrī signifies a ‘female attendant’ or ‘handmaid.’<ref name=fx3_ve1_1701> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 2, 7, 4;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1;<br> Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 21, n. 2.</ref>

परि-व्राजक
<u>'''Pari-vrājaka'''</u> (lit., ‘wandering about’) denotes in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (i. 14; ii. 8) a ‘mendicant monk.’<br>==Foot Notes==

परि-षद्
<u>'''Pari-ṣad'''</u> (lit., ‘sitting around’) denotes in the Upaniṣads<ref name=fx1_ve1_1703> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 1 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 2, 1 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> ''daivī [[परिषद्|pariṣad]],'' Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 11, 13. 14.</ref> an ‘assemblage’ of advisers in questions of philosophy, and the Gobhila [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1703> iii. 2, 40.</ref> refers to a teacher with his [[परिषद्|Pariṣad]] or ‘council.’ In the later literature the word denotes a body of advisers on religious topics, but also the assessors of a judge, or the council of ministers of a prince.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1703> ''Cf.'' Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 136, 137;<br> Foy, ''Die kōnigliche Gewalt,'' 16-19;<br> 3337;<br> 66;<br> Bühler, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 55, 56;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 124.</ref> But in none of these senses is the word found in the early literature, though the institutions indicated by it must have existed at least in embryo.

परि-ष्कन्द
<u>'''Pari-ṣkanda'''</u> (lit., ‘leaping around’) occurs in the '''[[व्रात्य|Vrātya]]''' hymn of the Atharvaveda (xv. 2, 1 ''et seq.'') denoting, in the dual, the two footmen running beside a chariot.<br>==Foot Notes==

परि-ष्यन्द
<u>'''Pari-ṣyanda'''</u> (with water ‘flowing around’) in two passages of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ix. 1, 19; xiv. 3, 1, 14) denotes a sandbank or island in a river. <br>==Foot Notes==

परि-सारक
<u>'''Pari-sāraka'''</u> is the name of a place, an island formed by the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]''' ‘flowing around’ it, according to a story in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ii. 19).<br>==Foot Notes==

परि-स्रुत्
<u>'''Pari-srut'''</u> is the name of a drink which is mentioned first in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1707> iii. 12, 7;<br> xx. 127, 9. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 68.</ref> and which was distinct from both '''[[सुरा|Surā]]''' and '''Soma,'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1707> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, 2, 14. ''Cf.'' v. 5, 4, 10;<br> xi. 5, 5, 13;<br> xii. 7, 1, 7;<br> 8, 2, 15;<br> 9, 1, 1.</ref> but was intoxicating. According to Mahīdhara,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1707> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ii. 34.</ref> the liquor was made from flowers ('''[[पुष्प|Puṣpa]]'''). Zimmer<ref name=fx4_ve1_1707> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 281, 282.</ref> thinks that it was the family drink, and this is supported by the fact that in the Atharvaveda it twice occurs as a household beverage.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1707> See also Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 15;<br> xx. 59;<br> xxi. 29;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 2. Its nature is more elaborately explained in the Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiv. 1, 14;<br> xv. 10, 11;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 349, 350.</ref> Hillebrandt<ref name=fx6_ve1_1707> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 24, 8.</ref> is of opinion that it was very much the same as [[सुरा|Surā]].

परी-णह्
<u>'''1. Parī-ṇah'''</u> appears to denote a ‘box’ or something similar in the Atharvaveda (xix. 48, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

परी-णह्
<u>'''2. Parī-ṇah'''</u> is the name of a place in '''[[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]]''' mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1709> xxv. 13, 1.</ref> the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1709> v. 1, 1.</ref> and the Sūtras.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1709> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 19, 1;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxiv. 6, 34;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 29, 32.</ref>

परी-शास
<u>'''Parī-śāsa'''</u> is the name of an instrument of the nature of tongs, used to lift the sacrificial kettle off the fire.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1710> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1, 3, 1;<br> 2, 1, 16;<br> 2, 54;<br> 3, 1, 20, etc.</ref>

परुच्-छेप
<u>'''Paruc-chepa'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] to whom the Anukramaṇī (Index) attributes a series of hymns<ref name=fx1_ve1_1711> Rv. i. 127-139.</ref> in the Rigveda, and whose  authorship is asserted in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1711> v. 12. 13 (where hymns Rv. i. 128, 129, 130, 133, 135, 137, 139, are attributed to him).</ref> and the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1711> xxiii. 4. 5.</ref> Brāhmaṇas, as well as in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_1711> x. 42.</ref> In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx5_ve1_1711> ii. 5, 8, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 116. Parucchepa's claim to authorship is very doubtful.</ref> he appears as a rival of '''Nṛmedhas.'''

परुष
<u>'''Paruṣa'''</u> seems to mean ‘reed’ in the Atharvaveda (viii. 8, 4) and ‘arrow’ in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xiv. 22, 20).<br>==Foot Notes==

परुष्णी
<u>'''Paruṣṇī'''</u> is the name of a river which is mentioned in the [[नदी|Nadī]]-[[स्तुति|stuti]] (‘Praise of Rivers’),<ref name=fx1_ve1_1713> x. 75, 5.</ref> and in the song of Sudās’ victory over the ten kings,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1713> vii. 18, 8. 9.</ref> which seems to have been made decisive by the rise of the river drowning the fugitives.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1713> It is impossible to decide precisely what part the river played in the battle. It is usually held that the enemies of [[सुदास्|Sudās]] tried to divert the stream, but failed, and were drowned in its current. So Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 11;<br> Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 154;<br> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Kommentar,'' 103, holds that [[सुदास्|Sudās]] was caught between two opposing armies, and had to escape over the [[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]], that his enemies tried to divert it to render him more accessible to their attack, but failed, and were overwhelmed in the river. Hopkins, ''India, Old and New,'' 52 ''et seq.,'' may be right in rejecting ''in toto'' the theory of the attempted diversion of the waters, though in the ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 261 ''et seq.,'' he accepted the traditional view.</ref> In these passages and one of the eighth book of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1713> viii. 74, 15.</ref> where it is called a ‘great stream’ (''mahenadi''), the name is certainly that of the river later called Ravi (Irāvatī), as recognized by [[यास्क|Yāska]].<ref name=fx5_ve1_1713> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 26.</ref> Pischel<ref name=fx6_ve1_1713> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 208-210.</ref> sees a reference to it in two other passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx7_ve1_1713> iv. 22, 2;<br> v. 52, 9.</ref> where ‘wool’ (''ūṛṇā'') is connected with the word ''[[परुष्णी|paruṣṇī]],'' and the allusion to the river is accepted by Max Müller<ref name=fx8_ve1_1713> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 315, 323.</ref> and Oldenberg,<ref name=fx9_ve1_1713> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 348.</ref> though they are not fully agreed as to the exact sense of the passages in question. Pischel suggests that the name is derived from the ‘flocks’ (''[[परुस्|parus]]'') of wool, not from the bends of the river, as understood by the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx5_ve1_1713/> or from its reeds, as Roth<ref name=fx10_ve1_1713> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 4''a.''</ref> suggests. <br><br>The mention of the [[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]] and the [[यमुना|Yamunā]] in the hymn celebrating the victory of [[सुदास्|Sudās]] has given rise to the conjectures of Hopkins,<ref name=fx11_ve1_1713> ''Op. cit.,'' 52.</ref> that the [[यमुना|Yamunā]] in that hymn is merely another name for the [[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]], and of Geldner,<ref name=fx12_ve1_1713> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]], Glossar,'' 106.</ref> that the [[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]] there is merely a tributary of the [[यमुना|Yamunā]] (Jumna). But neither interpretation is either essential or even probable. The hymn is a condensed one, and may well be taken as celebrating two great victories of [[सुदास्|Sudās]]. There is a doubtful reference to the [[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]] in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx13_ve1_1713> vi. 12, 3. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 462;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 289.</ref>

परुस्
<u>'''Parus'''</u> means first a ‘limb’ or ‘member’ of the body,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1714> Rv. i. 162, 18;<br> x. 97, 12;<br> 100, 5;<br> Av. i. 12, 3;<br> iv. 12, 2. 3, etc.</ref> and is then applied metaphorically to the divisions of the sacrifice<ref name=fx2_ve1_1714> Rv. x. 53, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 9, 1.</ref> or of the year<ref name=fx3_ve1_1714> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 6, 1.</ref> (''cf.'' '''[[पर्वन्|Parvan]]''').

पर्ण
<u>'''1. Parṇa'''</u> denotes the ‘wing’ of a bird in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1715> i. 116, 15;<br> 182, 7;<br> 183, 1;<br> iv. 27, 4, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1715> Av. x. 1, 29;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 5, etc.</ref> It also means the ‘feather’ of an arrow in a late passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1715> x. 18, 14. ''Cf.'' Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 386.</ref> and more often later;<ref name=fx4_ve1_1715> Av. v. 25, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxv. 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 25;<br> iii. 26, etc.</ref> and the ‘leaf’ of a tree from the Rigveda onwards.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1715> Rv. x. 68, 10;<br> Av. viii. 7, 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 1, 7;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 46, etc.</ref>

पर्ण
<u>'''2. Parṇa'''</u> denotes the tree ''Butea frondosa,'' later usually called '''[[पलाश|Palāśa]].''' It occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1716> x. 97, 5.</ref> in connexion with the '''[[अश्वत्थ|Aśvattha]],''' and with that tree as well as the '''[[न्यग्रोध|Nyagrodha]]''' in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1716> v. 5, 5.</ref> which mentions both amulets<ref name=fx3_ve1_1716> iii. 5, 4. 8.</ref> and the cover of sacrificial dishes<ref name=fx4_ve1_1716> xviii. 4, 53.</ref> as made from its wood. Its use for the  making of sacrificial implements like the ladle (''[[जुहू|juhū]]''),<ref name=fx5_ve1_1716> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 59, 7, 2. ''Cf.'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 1.</ref> or sacrificial posts,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1716> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxi. 4, 13.</ref> or the small ladle called ''[[स्रुव|sruva]],''<ref name=fx7_ve1_1716> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 2. ''Cf.'' viii. 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 3, 11;<br> 7, 1, 9;<br> 8, 7.</ref> is mentioned. The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx8_ve1_1716> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.,'' and ''cf.'' Kuhn, ''Die Herabkunft des Feuers und des Go7ttertranks,'' 148, 192;<br> Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 20, 24;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 331, 332;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 91.</ref> ascribes its origin to the loss of a feather by the Gāyatrī when winning the Soma. The tree is also often mentioned elsewhere.<ref name=fx9_ve1_1716> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 4, 10;<br> vi. 5, 1, 1;<br> xi. 1, 4, 2;<br> 7, 28;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 5, 4.</ref> Reference too is sometimes made to its bark (''[[पर्ण|parṇa]]-[[वल्क|valka]]'').<ref name=fx10_ve1_1716> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 3, 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7, 4, 2, 18, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altinadisches Leben,'' 59;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 194, 195.</ref>

पर्णक
<u>'''Parṇaka'''</u> is the name of a man included in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1717> xxx. 16.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1717> iii. 4, 12, 1.</ref> According to Mahīdhara,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1717> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> a Bhilla is meant--''i.e.,'' presumably a wild hillman, for he glosses '''[[निषाद|Niṣāda]]''' in the same way.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1717> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 27.</ref> Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx5_ve1_1717> On [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> explains the word as meaning ‘one who catches fish by putting over the water a ''[[पर्ण|parṇa]]'' with poison,’ but this is apparently a mere etymological guess. Weber's<ref name=fx6_ve1_1717> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländiscnen Gesellschaft,'' 18, 281.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 119.</ref> rendering of the term as referring to a savage ‘wearing feathers’ is ingenious, but uncertain.

पर्ण-धि
<u>'''Parṇa-dhi'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1718> iv. 6, 5. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 300;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 375;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 154.</ref> denotes the part of the shaft in which the feather of the arrow is fastened.

पर्णय
<u>'''Parṇaya'''</u> is the name in two passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1719> i. 53, 8;<br> x. 48, 2.</ref> either of a hero, as Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_1719> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 149.</ref> thinks, or of a demon<ref name=fx3_ve1_1719> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> overcome by Indra. 

पर्य्-अङ्क
<u>'''Pary-aṅka'''</u> is the name of the seat of the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1720> i. 5.</ref> It seems to correspond to what is elsewhere called '''Āsandi;'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1720> Av. xv. 3, 3. ''Cf.'' xiv. 2, 65;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 5, 6, 12.</ref> as used in the [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], it can, however, hardly mean a long seat for reclining on, but rather a throne.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1720> ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 397, 401;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 155;<br> Lanmar in Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 765, 776.</ref>

पर्य्-आस
<u>'''Pary-āsa'''</u> is used in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 1, 2, 18) to denote the woof of cloth, the warp being called ''anuchāda.''<br>==Foot Notes==

पर्वत
<u>'''1. Parvata'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1722> i. 37, 7;<br> v. 56, 4.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1722> Av. iv. 6, 8;<br> vi. 12, 3;<br> 17, 3;<br> ix. 1, 18;<br> xii. 1, 11.</ref> is conjoined with ''giri'' in the sense of ‘hill’ or ‘mountain.’ From the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_1722> i. 39, 5;<br> 52, 2;<br> 155;<br> 1;<br> 191, 9;<br> ii. 12, 2, 3;<br> 17, 5, etc.</ref> onwards<ref name=fx4_ve1_1722> Av. i. 14, 1;<br> iii. 21, 10;<br> iv. 9, 8;<br> viii. 7, 17;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 5, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvii. 1;<br> xviii. 13, etc.</ref> it is common in this sense as connected with the waters of rivers which flow in the hills.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1722> Rv. vii. 34, 23;<br> 35, 8;<br> viii. 18, 16;<br> 31, 10;<br> x. 35, 2;<br> 36, 1, etc.;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' i. 80;<br> 2, 66.</ref> The legend of the mountains having wings is already found in the Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx6_ve1_1722> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvi. 9;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 10, 13;<br> and Rv. iv. 54, 5, as explained by Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 174.</ref> In the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx7_ve1_1722> ii. 13;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 407;<br> Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 28, n. 1.</ref> are mentioned the southern (''dakṣiṇa'') and the northern (''uttara'') mountains, evidently in allusion to the Himālaya and the Vindhya ranges. The plants (''[[ओषधि|oṣadhi]]'') and aromatic products (''añjana'') of the mountains are referred to in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx8_ve1_1722> xix. 44, 6;<br> 45. 7.</ref> and their mineral treasures in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx9_ve1_1722> x. 69, 6.</ref>

पर्वत
<u>'''2. Parvata'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1723> vii. 87, 8</ref> denotes, according to Ludwing,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1723> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 159.</ref> a sacrificer whose generosity is praised. But it is probable that the god [[पर्वत|Parvata]], the spirit of the mountain, is meant.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1723> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> 

पर्वत
<u>'''3. Parvata'''</u> is mentioned several times in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1724> vii. 13, 34;<br> viii. 21;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 17. 4.</ref> along with '''[[नारद|Nārada]].''' The Anukramaṇī (Index) attributes to him the authorship of several hymns of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1724> viii. 12, ix, 104;<br> 105.</ref>

पर्वन्
<u>'''Parvan'''</u> denotes the knots of the reed or the joints of a plant,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1725> Av. xii. 3, 31;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i, 1, 2, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 3, 1, 31, and ''cf.'' Rv. x. 68, 9.</ref> and more generally a part or limb of the body.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1725> Rv. i. 61, 12;<br> iv. 19, 9;<br> viii. 48, 5;<br> x. 89, 8;<br> Av. i. 11, 1;<br> 12, 2;<br> ii. 9, 1;<br> vi. 14, 1;<br> xi. 8, 12;<br> xii. 5, 71;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 31;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 35 ''et seq.;<br>'' iii. 4, 4, 2;<br> vi. 1, 2, 31;<br> x. 4, 5, 2, etc.</ref> It also designates a period of time, probably with reference to the breaks in the month at new and full moon.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1725> Rv. i. 94, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 43;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 35;<br> vi. 2, 2, 34, etc. ''Cf.'' '''[[मास|Māsa]].''' In the Sūtras the days of the four-monthly festivals (''cāturmāsaya'') are so called: Kātyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], v. 2, 13;<br> xxii. 7, 1. 16. 17;<br> xxiv. 4, 30;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiv. 5, 6;<br> 10, 4. 18;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 2, 3;<br> and more often the periods of the change of moon: Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]. xxiv. 6, 4. 25. 30;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 2, 1;<br> 3, 1;<br> Lāṭyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 8, 46, etc.</ref> In one passage<ref name=fx4_ve1_1725> vii. 103, 5.</ref> Geldner<ref name=fx5_ve1_1725> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]], Glossar,'' 107.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 364, who quotes Tacitus, ''Germania,'' 11.</ref> thinks the word indicates a song section of the [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]].

पर्शान
<u>'''Parśāna,'''</u> ‘hollow,’ is mentioned several times in the Rigveda (vii. 104, 5; viii. 7, 34; 45, 41).<br>==Foot Notes==

पर्शु
<u>'''1. Parśu'''</u> denotes ‘rib’ in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1727> ix. 7, 6;<br> x. 9, 20;<br> xi. 3, 12.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1727> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 25, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxi. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 6, 2, 10;<br> x. 6, 4, 1;<br> xii. 3, 1, 6;<br> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, etc.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[शरीर|Śarīra]].'''

पर्शु
<u>'''2. Parśu'''</u> seems in some passages<ref name=fx1_ve1_1728> Av. xii. 3, 31 ([[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 24. 25;<br> viii. 11;<br> lxi. 38. 39);<br> perhaps vii. 28, 1 = [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 4, 1. See Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 407, 408;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 26 (where ''[[पर्शु|parśu]]'' is metrically needed), etc. ''Cf.'' Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> to denote a ‘sickle,’ being apparently a variant of '''[[परशु|Paraśu]].''' 

पर्शु
<u>'''3. Parśu'''</u> in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1729> iv. 6.</ref> is explained in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1729> i. 105, 8;<br> x. 33, 2.</ref> as meaning the sides of a cistern (''[[कूप|kūpa]]'').<ref name=fx3_ve1_1729> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 100;<br> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 107.</ref> But the sense of ‘ribs’ is quite adequate there.

पर्शु
<u>'''4. Parśu'''</u> occurs in one passage in a Dānastuti (‘praise of gifts’) in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1730> viii. 6, 46.</ref> as the name of a man. It is not certain that he is identical with '''[[तिरिन्दिर|Tirindira]],''' but the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1730> xvi. 11, 20.</ref> mentions [[तिरिन्दिर|Tirindira]] [[पारशव्य|Pāraśavya]] as the patron of '''[[वत्स|Vatsa]] [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].''' In another passage occurring in the Vṛṣākapi hymn,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1730> x. 86, 23. Apparently Vārttika 2, on Pāṇini, iv. 1, 177, where [[पर्शु|Parśu]] is explained as a feminine, Princess of the Parśus, refers to this passage. On the sense, ''cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 42;<br> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 107;<br> and [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 2, 2, where the expression occurs, but where the sense is very dubious.</ref> [[पर्शु|Parśu]] [[मानवी|Mānavī]] occurs, apparently as a woman, daughter of Manu, but who is meant it is quite impossible to say. Excepting these two, there are no other occurrences in which the word has with any probability the value of a proper name in the Rigveda.<br><br>Ludwig,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1730> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 196 ''et seq.''</ref> however, sees in several other places an allusion to the Parśus. Thus in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx5_ve1_1730> x. 33, 2. The sense here is, no doubt, ‘ribs.’ See Geldner, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 184, n. 3;<br> Bergaigne, ''Religion Védique,'' 2, 362, n.</ref> he finds a reference to the defeat of '''Kuruśravaṇa''' by the Parśus; in another<ref name=fx6_ve1_1730> vii. 83, 1, ''[[पृथु|pṛthu]]-parśavaḥ,'' which really means either ‘with large ribs’-''i.e.,'' ‘strong,’ as Roth, with Sāyaṇa, inclines to take it--or ‘with broad axes,’ according to Zimmer.</ref> he finds a reference to the Pṛthus and Parśus--''i.e.,'' the Parthians and the Persians. He also sees the Parthians in '''[[पार्थव|Pārthava]],''' a name found in one hymn.<ref name=fx7_ve1_1730> vi. 27, 8.</ref> The same view is taken by Weber,<ref name=fx8_ve1_1730> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 379;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 4;<br> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 36 ''et seq.'' He confines his view to the equation of [[पर्शु|Parśu]] in Rigveda, viii. 6, 46, and the Persians. Hillebrandt, who is inclined to see relations with Iran in early times (see '''[[पणि|Paṇi]], [[पारावत|Pārāvata]], [[सृञ्जय|Sṛñjaya]]'''), does not in this connexion quote [[पर्शु|Parśu]] at all, and, though he mentions [[पार्थव|Pārthava]], does not regard it as probably referring to a Parthian (''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 105). Brunnhofer, in his various works (''Iran und Turan,'' 1889;<br> ''vom Pontus bis zum Indus,'' 1890, etc.), finds constant references in the Veda to events in Iran, but his theories must be regarded as definitely unscientific. See also Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 264, n.</ref> who holds that historical connexions with the  Persians are referred to. But Zimmer<ref name=fx9_ve1_1730> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 134 ''et seq.;<br>'' 433. ''Ibid.,'' 434, 435, he refutes conclusively Ludwig's extraordinary view that [[पृथु|Pṛthu]] and [[पर्शु|Parśu]] are dialectical forms of the same word.</ref> points out that this conclusion is not justified; the Parśus were known to Pāṇini<ref name=fx10_ve1_1730> v. 3, 117.</ref> as a warrior tribe; the Pāraśavas were a tribe in south-west '''[[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]];''' and the ''Periplus''<ref name=fx11_ve1_1730> c. 38.</ref> knows a tribe of Parthoi in north India. At most the only conclusion to be drawn is that the Indians and Iranians were early connected, as was of course the case. Actual historical contact cannot be asserted with any degree of probability.

पर्ष
<u>'''Parṣa'''</u> occurs in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1731> x. 48, 7;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 10. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 238. Perhaps ''parṣin,'' in the compound ''[[इषु|iṣu]]-parṣin'' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 2, 5, means ‘having a bundle (of arrows).’</ref> denoting in the plural ‘sheaves’ strewn over the threshing floor. ''Cf.'' '''[[खल|Khala]].'''

पलद
<u>'''Palada'''</u> occurs twice in one hymn of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1732> ix. 3, 5, 17. ''Cf.'' Zimmer. ''Altindisches Leben,'' 153;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 194, 195.</ref> in the description of a house. It seems to mean bundles of straw or reeds used to thatch the house and render the sides wind and weather proof.

पलस्ति
<u>'''Palasti.'''</u> See '''[[पलित|Palita]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

पलाल
<u>'''Palāla'''</u> is found with Anu-[[पलाल|palāla]] in the Atharvaveda (viii. 6, 2) as the name of a demon. The meaning of the word is ‘straw,’ in which sense it occurs in the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (lxxx. 27), while the feminine form, Palālī, is found in the Atharvaveda itself (ii. 8, 3) as the straw of barley ('''Yava''').<br>==Foot Notes==

पलाव
<u>'''Palāva'''</u> is found in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1735> xii. 3, 19, where some manuscripts read ''palāvā.''</ref> and the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1735> i. 54, 1</ref> in the sense of ‘chaff.’ 

पलाश
<u>'''Palāśa,'''</u> like '''[[पर्ण|Parṇa]],''' denotes ‘leaf’ in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1736> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 4, 5;<br> v. 2, 1, 17 etc.;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 14, 3.</ref> It also<ref name=fx2_ve1_1736> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 3, 19;<br> ii. 6, 2, 8, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 59.</ref> designates the tree ''Butea frondosa,'' of which [[पर्ण|Parṇa]] is the early name.

पलित
<u>'''Palita,'''</u> ‘grey-haired,’ occurs frequently from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1737> i. 144, 4;<br> 164, 1;<br> iii. 55, 9;<br> x. 4, 5, etc.</ref> onwards.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1737> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 15, etc.</ref> It is the distinctive sign of old age. Those who, like certain descendants of '''[[जमद्अग्नि|Jamadagni]],''' do not grow old,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1737> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 9, 1;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxi. 10, 6. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 54, and Rv. iii. 53, 16, where ''[[पलस्ति|palasti]]'' seems to mean ''[[पलित|palita]].''</ref> are said not to become grey-haired, while '''[[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]]''' is described as having in his old age become thin and grey-haired.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1737> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 49.</ref> The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_1737> xi. 4, 1, 6. 14.</ref> in one passage observes that grey hairs appear first on the head, and elsewhere<ref name=fx6_ve1_1737> iii. 8, 2, 25.</ref> alludes to the hair on the arms having become grey.

पल्पूलन
<u>'''Palpūlana'''</u> is found in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1738> xii. 4, 9. ''Cf.'' [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xi. 16.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_1738> ii. 5, 5, 6.</ref> apparently meaning, properly, ‘lye,’ or water impregnated with some biting substance for washing clothes. In the [[अथर्वन्|Atharvan]] passage urine seems to be meant.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1738> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 695. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 74, 175.</ref> The verb ''palpūlaya,'' ‘to wash with alkaline water,’ occurs in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve1_1738/> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]];<ref name=fx4_ve1_1738> i. 3, 5, 2. 3.</ref> and the Sūtras refer to hides (''[[चर्मन्|carman]]'')<ref name=fx5_ve1_1738> [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 67.</ref> and garments<ref name=fx6_ve1_1738> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 8, 12. ''Cf.'' [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]. i. 6, 13, 15;<br> Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> so washed. ''Cf.'' also '''[[वासःपल्पूली|Vāsaḥpalpūlī]].'''

पल्लि-गुप्त लौहित्य
<u>'''Palli-[[गुप्त|gupta]] Lauhitya'''</u> (‘descendant of Lohita’) is mentioned in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (‘list of teachers’) in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 42, 1) as a pupil of '''[[श्यामजयन्त लौहित्य|Śyāmajayanta Lauhitya]].'''  The name is obviously a late one, for Palli is not found in the early literature, and the name of the [[लौहित्य|Lauhitya]] family is otherwise known in post-Vedic works only.<br>==Foot Notes==

पवन
<u>'''Pavana'''</u> (‘purifier’) in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1740> iv. 34, 2;<br> xviii. 3, 11. ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 9.</ref> denotes an instrument for purifying grain from husks, etc.; either a ‘sieve’ or a ‘winnowing basket’ may be meant. In the Sūtras<ref name=fx2_ve1_1740> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 5, 7.</ref> it is mentioned as used for cleaning the bones of the dead after cremation.

पवमान
<u>'''Pavamāna'''</u> is a term very frequently applied in the Rigveda to the Soma ‘purifying itself’ by running through the sieve. Later it appears in a few passages<ref name=fx1_ve1_1741> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 20, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vi. 17;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7.</ref> in the sense of ‘wind’ (as a purifier).

पवस्त
<u>'''Pavasta'''</u> in one passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1742> iv. 5, 6. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda. 156.</ref> apparently denotes ‘covers.’

पवि
<u>'''Pavi'''</u> denotes the ‘tire’ of the wheel of a chariot in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1743> i. 34, 2;<br> 88, 2;<br> 139, 3;<br> 166, 10, etc.;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 5.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1743> [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]], ii. 7, 1, 15, 3, etc.</ref> Reference is made<ref name=fx3_ve1_1743> Rv. vi. 54, 3.</ref> to the necessity for fastening it on firmly, and the epithet ''su-pavi,'' ‘having a good tire,’ is found in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_1743> Av. iv. 12, 6.</ref> with ''su-[[नाभि|nābhi]],'' ‘having a good nave,’ and ''su-[[चक्र|cakra]],'' ‘having a good wheel.’ The tires were, of course, of metal,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1743> Of gold in the case of the Aśvins and the Maruts, Rv. i. 64, 11;<br> 180, 1.</ref> and being sharp,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1743> Rv. i. 166, 10.</ref> could serve on occasion as weapons.<ref name=fx7_ve1_1743> Rv. v. 52, 9. ''Cf.'' vi. 8, 5, and x 180, 2.</ref> The St. Petersburg Dictionary in one passage of  the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx8_ve1_1743> vi. 30. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 9, 4, 5. Mahīdhara, on the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, takes ''pavinā'' as ''vajrasadṛśena,'' ‘like a thunderbolt,’ and Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 239, 240, renders ''pavi'' by ‘bolt.’</ref> takes Pavi to mean a metal rim on the stone for pounding Soma, but this seems improbable, because no such metal attachment is elsewhere alluded to. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx9_ve1_1743> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 44.</ref> seems clearly right in accepting the sense of ‘sharp edge’ in this passage, especially as the stones in the Rigveda<ref name=fx10_ve1_1743> v. 31. 5.</ref> are, in allusion to their rolling action, styled ‘rims without horses and without chariots’ (''anaśvāsaḥ pavayo 'rathāḥ'').<br><br>The [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx11_ve1_1743> xii. 30.</ref> ascribes to Pavi the sense of arrow (''[[शल्य|śalya]]''), but this is very uncertain. The St. Petersburg Dictionary cites for this use two passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx12_ve1_1743> ix. 50, 1;<br> x. 180, 2.</ref> but in one the secondary sense of sharp-edged weapon with reference to the bolt of Indra is quite likely, and in the other, where the expression ''vāṇasya pavi'' occurs, the sharp-edged pounding-stone of the ‘reed,’<ref name=fx13_ve1_1743> ''Cf.'' Rv. iv. 24, 9, where the expression ''vāṇaṃ duhanti,'' ‘they milk out the reed,’ occurs.</ref> meaning the stalk of the Soma plant, may be meant. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx14_ve1_1743> ''Op. cit.,'' 1, 43, 44.</ref> thinks a reference to the shape of the Soma plant is intended. Pavī-nasa, the name of a demon mentioned in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx15_ve1_1743> viii. 6, 21.</ref> seems to throw no light on this point, for while the St. Petersburg Dictionary takes it to mean ‘whose nose is like a spearhead,’ it is translated as ‘rim-nosed’ (presumably in allusion to the curved shape of the nose) by Whitney.<ref name=fx16_ve1_1743> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 497.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 248;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 12, n. 1.</ref>

पवित्र
<u>'''Pavitra'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1744> i. 28, 9;<br> iii. 36, 7;<br> viii. 33, 1;<br> 101, 9, etc.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1744> Av. vi. 124, 3;<br> ix. 6, 16;<br> xii. 1, 30;<br> 3, 3. 14. 25, etc.</ref> the sieve used for purifying the Soma, the only mode of purifying it certainly<ref name=fx3_ve1_1744> ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 239, 240.</ref> known to the Rigveda. It seems clearly<ref name=fx4_ve1_1744> ''Cf.'' the names of it: ''aṇva,'' Rv. ix. 16, 2;<br> ''aṇvāni meṣyaḥ,'' 86, 47;<br> 107, 11;<br> ''avayaḥ,'' ii. 36, 1;<br> ix. 86, 11;<br> 91, 2;<br> ''tvac'' with ''avya'' or ''avyaya,'' ix. 69, 3;<br> 70, 7;<br> ''meṣyaḥ,'' ix. 8, 5;<br> ''rūpa avyaya,'' ix. 16, 6;<br> ''roman,'' alone or with ''avyaya;<br> vāra,'' alone or with ''avyaya,'' etc.</ref> to have been made of  sheep's wool, whether woven or plaited is not certain, for the expressions used are too vague to be decisive, though Zimmer<ref name=fx5_ve1_1744> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 278, n.</ref> thinks ''hvarāṃsi''<ref name=fx6_ve1_1744> ix. 3, 2;<br> 63, 4.</ref> points to plaiting.

पवीर
<u>'''Pavīra,'''</u> according to the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1745> xii. 30, In Rv. i. 174, 4, ''pavīrava'' seems to mean ‘thunderbolt.’</ref> denotes a ‘lance.’ The epithet derived from this word, ''pavīravant'' or ''pavīrava,'' which is found in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1745> iii. 17, 3.</ref> and the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1745> ''Pavīravant,'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xii. 71;<br> ''pavīrava,'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, 10, 2, 5, 6;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 7, 12;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvi. 11.</ref> is used of the plough, apparently in the sense of ‘having a metal share.’ The same epithet occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_1745> x. 60, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 116.</ref> applied to a man, in the sense of ‘having a goad’ or ‘having a spear.’

पवीरु
<u>'''Pavīru'''</u> appears in a hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1746> viii. 51, 9 = Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxiii. 82.</ref> as a '''[[रुशम|Ruśama]],''' being a prince or at least a wealthy noble.

पशु
<u>'''Paśu'''</u> means ‘animal’ generally, including man. There is frequent mention<ref name=fx1_ve1_1747> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 10, 1-4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvi. 17;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 7, 17;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 47-51, ''Cf.'' Av. xi. 2, 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 10, 1-3;<br> v. 5, 1, 1. 2;<br> vi. 5, 10, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiv. 28-31, etc.</ref> of the five sacrificial animals--the horse, the cow, the sheep, the goat, and man. Seven such domestic animals are spoken of in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1747> Av. iii. 10, 6.</ref> and later;<ref name=fx3_ve1_1747> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 8, 4, 16;<br> ix. 3, 1, 20;<br> xii. 8, 3, 13 (where they are called ''jāgatāḥ,'' perhaps as numbering 12);<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], x. 2, 7.</ref> probably, as Whitney<ref name=fx4_ve1_1747> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 103.</ref> observes, merely as a sacred mystic number, not, as the commentator<ref name=fx5_ve1_1747> On Av. iii. 10, 6. The St. Petersburg Dictionary suggests ‘mule’ and ‘ass’ as the two making up seven (''cf.'' Mahābhārata, vi. 165 ''et seq.''). Zimmer's view (''Altindisches Leben,'' 76) is that ‘goat,’ ‘sheep,’ ‘ox,’ ‘horse,’ ‘dog,’ ‘ass,’ and ‘camel’ or ‘mule,’ are meant.</ref> explains, the usual five with the ass and the camel added. Animals are also referred to as ''ubhayadant''  and ''anyatodant.'' They are further<ref name=fx6_ve1_1747> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 4, 5, 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 7 (where ''[[पुरुष|puruṣa]]'' must be read for ''[[परुष|paruṣa]]'').</ref> classified as those which take hold with the hand (''hastādānāḥ''), man (''[[पुरुष|puruṣa]]''), elephant (''[[हस्तिन्|hastin]]''), and ape (''[[मर्कट|markaṭa]]''), and those which grasp by the mouth (''mukhādānāḥ''). Another division is that of biped (''[[द्विपाद्|dvipād]]'') and quadruped (''catuṣpād'').<ref name=fx7_ve1_1747> Rv. iii. 62, 14;<br> Av. iii. 34, 1, etc. Zimmer, 73, n., suggests that the division is Indo-European, as the Inguvenic tables make a distinction between ''dupursus'' and ''peturpursus.''</ref> Man is a biped;<ref name=fx8_ve1_1747> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 10, 1, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvii. 47, 48.</ref> he is the first (''prathama'') of the beasts;<ref name=fx9_ve1_1747> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 2, 1, 18;<br> vii. 5, 2, 6.</ref> he alone of animals lives a hundred years (''śatāyus''),<ref name=fx10_ve1_1747> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 6, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 2, 5, 17.</ref> and he is king of the animals.<ref name=fx11_ve1_1747> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xx. 10;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 5, 5, 7. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 18, 274.</ref> He possesses speech (''[[वाच्|vāc]]'') in conjunction with the other animals.<ref name=fx12_ve1_1747> Rv. viii. 100, 11.</ref> In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx13_ve1_1747> ii. 3, 2, with Keith's note.</ref> an elaborate distinction is drawn between vegetables, animals, and man in point of intellect.<br><br>Of animals apart from man a threefold division is offered in the Rigveda<ref name=fx14_ve1_1747> x. 90, 8.</ref> --into those of the air (''vāyavya''), those of the jungle (''āraṇya''), and those of the village (''grāmya''), or tame animals. The division into ''āraṇya'' and ''grāmya'' animals is quite common.<ref name=fx15_ve1_1747> Av. iii. 31, 3. ''Cf.'' ii. 34, 1, with Whitney's note, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 78;<br> xi. 2, 24;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 3;<br> 9, 7;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiii. 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 29. 32;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 1, 8;<br> 2, 8. ''Cf.'' xi. 8, 3, 2, where there is reference to animals being tied up at night in their stalls.</ref> In the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx16_ve1_1747> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv, 3, 10, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiv. 30.</ref> is found a division into ''eka-[[शफ|śapha]],'' ‘whole-hoofed’; ''kṣudra,'' ‘small’; and ''āraṇya,'' ‘wild,’ the two former classes denoting the tame animals.<ref name=fx16_ve1_1747/> The horse and the ass are ''eka-[[शफ|śapha]];''<ref name=fx17_ve1_1747> Zimmer, 74.</ref> the ''kṣudra'' are the sheep, the goat, and the ox: this distinction being parallel to that of ''ubhayadant'' and ''anyatodant.''<ref name=fx18_ve1_1747> ''Cf.'' Av. v. 31, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 6, 3, with [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 1, 5: v. 1, 1, 3;<br> 2, 6.</ref> Zimmer<ref name=fx19_ve1_1747> ''Op. cit.,'' 77, 78.</ref> sees in a passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx20_ve1_1747> xi, 2, 24. 25, compared with xii. 1, 40, 51.</ref> a division of wild animals (''āraṇya'') into five classes: (1) those of the jungle described as the ‘dread beasts  which are in the wood’ (''mṛgā bhīmā vane hitāḥ''); (2) winged creatures, represented by the '''[[हंस|Haṃsa]],''' ‘gander,’ '''[[सुपर्ण|Suparṇa]],''' ‘eagle,’ '''[[शकुन|Śakuna]],''' ‘bird’; (3) amphibia--'''[[शिंशुमार|Śiṃśumāra]],''' ‘alligator,’ and '''[[अजगर|Ajagara]],''' ‘crocodile’ (?); (4) ‘fish,’ '''[[पुरीकय|Purīkaya]], [[जष|Jaṣa]],''' and '''[[मत्स्य|Matsya]];''' (5) insects and worms (described as ''rajasāḥ''). But this division is more ingenious than probable, and it is ignored by both Bloomfield<ref name=fx21_ve1_1747> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 631.</ref> and Whitney.<ref name=fx22_ve1_1747> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 633, 634.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 72. 77.</ref>

पशु-प
<u>'''Paśu-pa'''</u> denotes ‘herdsman’ in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1748> i. 114, 9;<br> 144, 6;<br> iv. 6, 4;<br> x. 142, 2.</ref> Metaphorically the term is applied to Pūṣan.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1748> vi. 58, 2. ''Cf.'' of Pūṣan and [[रेवती|Revatī]], [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 2, 12.</ref>

पष्ठ-वाह्
<u>'''1. Paṣṭha-vāh'''</u> occurs in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_1749> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 5, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiv. 9;<br> xviii. 27;<br> xxi. 17;<br> xxiv. 13. 28. 29. etc.</ref> meaning an ox, four years old, according to the commentators. This qualification is, however, very doubtful, for Paṣṭhauhī, ‘cow,’ a word occurring quite frequently,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1749> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā vii. 1, 6, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 2;<br> xii. 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 27;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 3, 3;<br> 8. 3, 2;<br> ii. 7, 2, 2, etc.</ref> is in one passage<ref name=fx3_ve1_1749> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 6, 1, 11.</ref> accompanied by the adjective ''prathama-garbhāḥ,'' ‘having a first calf,’ which disproves the theory of the age adopted by the commentators.

पष्ठ-वाह्
<u>'''2. Paṣṭha-vāh'''</u> is mentioned as a seer of Sāmans in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1750> xii. 5, 11. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 160.</ref>

पस्त्य-सद्
<u>'''Pastya-sad'''</u> (‘sitting in the house’) occurs in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1751> vi. 51, 9. ''Cf.'' Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 211.</ref> where the sense seems to be ‘inmate,’ ‘companion.’ 

पस्त्या
<u>'''Pastyā'''</u> (fem. pl.) is a word occurring in several passages of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1752> Rv. i. 25, 10;<br> 40, 7;<br> 164, 30;<br> iv, 1, 11;<br> vi, 49, 9;<br> vii. 97, 5;<br> ix, 65, 23;<br> x. 46, 6. See also iv. 55, 3;<br> viii. 27, 5, where [[पस्त्या|Pastyā]] appears as a goddess.</ref> Roth<ref name=fx2_ve1_1752> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> ascribes to it the meaning of ‘house’ or ‘dwelling,’ in the wide sense of the term, as well as that of the ‘family’ living in the house; and this view is accepted by Zimmer.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1752> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 149. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Über den [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]],'' 43, n. 4;<br> 63.</ref> On the other hand, Pischel<ref name=fx4_ve1_1752> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 211-22. So Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 107.</ref> finds in two of the passages<ref name=fx5_ve1_1752> vi. 49. 9;<br> vii. 97, 5, where the sense is ‘householder’ (''[[गृह|gṛha]]-stha'' or ''gṛhin,'' as Sāyaṇa renders it).</ref> usually referred to [[पस्त्या|Pastyā]] the neuter Pastya, which appears in '''[[पस्त्य-सद्|Pastya-sad]]''' and in '''[[पस्त्या-वन्त्|Pastyā-vant]]''' (where the length of the second syllable is not primitive¤), and which is certainly found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve1_1752> x. 96, 10. 11. In x. 96, 10, Roth takes ''pastyoḥ'' to denote the two parts of the Soma press, but Pischel, 2, 211, accepts Sāyaṇa's rendering ‘heaven and earth.’ In the compounds ''tripastya'' of Agni, Rv. viii. 39, 8;<br> ''vājapastya'' of Pūṣan, vi. 58, 2, of Soma, ix. 98, 12;<br> and ''[[वीर|vīra]]-pastya,'' v. 50, 4, the primitive word may very well be ''pastya,'' not ''[[पस्त्या|pastyā]].''</ref> in the metaphorical sense of ‘dwelling,’ ascribed to it in the Naighaṇṭuka.<ref name=fx7_ve1_1752> iii. 4, misquoted by Sāyaṇa on Rv. i. 151, 2, as applying to ''[[पस्त्या|pastyā]],'' whereas it really refers to ''pastya.''</ref> In the other passages<ref name=fx8_ve1_1752> Rv. i. 25, 10 = [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 16, 1 = Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 6, 2;<br> ii. 6, 12;<br> 7, 16;<br> iv. 4, 6 = Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 27;<br> Rv. i. 40, 7;<br> 164, 30 (used of Agni's home);<br> iv. 1, 11;<br> ix. 65, 23;<br> x. 46, 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 12, 1 = Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 8 = Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 7.</ref> he thinks the word means ‘rivers’ or ‘waters’; in particular, where Soma in the middle of the Pastyās<ref name=fx9_ve1_1752> Rv. ix. 65, 23.</ref> is spoken of, the sees a reference to '''[[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]],''' with its several rivers,<ref name=fx10_ve1_1752> Rv. iii. 23, 4.</ref> '''[[आपया|Āpayā]], [[दृषद्वती|Dṛṣadvatī]],''' and '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]''' (''cf.'' 2. '''[[पस्त्यावन्त्|Pastyāvant]]'''). In some passages<ref name=fx11_ve1_1752> Rv. iv. 55, 3;<br> viii. 27, 5;<br> and in ''[[पस्त्यावन्त्|pastyāvant]]'' in ix. 97, 18.</ref> he sees in [[पस्त्या|Pastyā]] the proper name of a stream, just as [[सिन्धु|Sindhu]] primarily means ‘river,’ then the ‘Indus.’

पस्त्या-वन्त्
<u>'''1. Pastyā-vant,'''</u> explained in the Pada text as Pastya-vant, occurs in several passages of the Rigveda. In two of them<ref name=fx1_ve1_1753> i. 151, 2;<br> ix. 97, 18;<br> but the latter passage is explained by Pischel as referring to '''[[पस्त्या|Pastyā]],''' the river, and by Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' as ‘kept in the stall.’</ref>  a rich householder seems meant, and in the two others reference to a ‘house’ is clear.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1753> ''[[बर्हिस्|Barhis]],'' Rv. ii. 11, 16, ‘of the house’;<br> ''kṣayān pastyāvataḥ,'' iv. 54, 5, ‘abodes having (fixed) habitations.’<br><br>''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 212.</ref>

पस्त्या-वन्त्
<u>'''2. Pastyā-vant'''</u> occurs in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1754> viii. 7, 29.</ref> in the locative parallel with '''Suṣoma, [[शर्यणावन्त्|Śaryaṇāvant]],''' and '''[[आर्जीक|Ārjīka]].''' It must apparently denote a place, as Pischel<ref name=fx2_ve1_1754> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 209.</ref> argues, probably corresponding to the locality ‘in the middle of the streams’ (''madhye pastyānām''), elsewhere<ref name=fx3_ve1_1754> Rv. ix. 65, 23.</ref> referred to as the home of Soma. Pischel<ref name=fx4_ve1_1754> ''Op. cit.,'' 2, 219.</ref> suggests that Patiāla is meant, though he does not lay any stress on the similarity of name. In the north of Patiāla there are hills where the Soma might have grown. Roth<ref name=fx5_ve1_1754> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 2. Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 260, 398, 399, takes [[पस्त्यावन्त्|Pastyāvant]] as a place-name, but thinks that ''[[पस्त्या|pastyā]]'' denotes ‘hamlet,’ or, as an epithet of Aditi, refers to her as a ‘housewife’ (Rv. iv. 55, 3;<br> viii. 27, 5).</ref> thought that something connected with the Soma press was meant.

पांसु
<u>'''Pāṃsu'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1755> vii. 109, 2;<br> xii. 1, 26.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1755> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 10, 2;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], xii. 19, etc.</ref> denotes ‘dust’ or ‘sand,’ usually in the plural. Among the portents enumerated in the Adbhuta [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1755> vi. 8 (''Indische Studien,'' 1, 40). ''Cf.'' Varāhamihira, Bṛhatsaṃhitā, xxii. 6.</ref> is a rain of dust or sand (''pāṃsuvarṣa''), a phenomenon not rare in India.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1755> The adjective ''pāṃsura'' is found in Rv. i. 22, 17, with a variant, ''pāṃsula,'' [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]], i. 3, 1, 3, 9. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 5, 1, 9.</ref>

पाक-दूर्वा
<u>'''Pāka-dūrvā'''</u> is, in a verse of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1756> x. 16, 13.</ref> included with '''[[कियाम्बु|Kiyāmbu]]''' and '''[[व्यल्कशा|Vyalkaśā]]''' among the plants used for growing on the spot where the corpse of the dead man has been consumed with fire.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1756> See Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 11, 342-350;<br> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, xxxix.</ref> The verse is repeated in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx3_ve1_1756> vi. 4, 1, 2.</ref>  with the variant Kyāmbu. In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_1756> xviii. 3, 6.</ref> the word is read Śāṇḍadūrvā. [[पाकदूर्वा|Pākadūrvā]] is probably, as Sāyaṇa-understands it, ''paripakva-[[दूर्वा|dūrvā]],'' ‘ripe or edible millet.’ Śāṇḍadūrvā is explained by the commentator<ref name=fx5_ve1_1756> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 850. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 70.</ref> in various ways, as millet ‘having egg-shaped roots’ (''i.e., sāṇḍa,'' not ''[[शाण्ड|śāṇḍa]]''), or as ‘having long joints,’ with the additional remark that it was called ''bṛhaddūrvā,'' ‘large millet.’ In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, on the other hand, the commentary explains [[पाकदूर्वा|Pākadūrvā]] as small millet.

पाक-स्थामन् कौरयाण
<u>'''Pāka-sthāman Kaurayāṇa'''</u> is celebrated as a generous donor  in a hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1757> viii. 3, 21. 24.</ref> Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve1_1757> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 160.</ref> suggests, without much reason, that he may have been a king of the '''Anus.'''

पाकरु
<u>'''Pākaru'''</u> is mentioned as a disease, together with '''[[विषूचिका|Viṣūcikā]]''' and '''[[अर्शस्|Arśas]],''' ‘hæmorrhoids,’ in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1758> xii. 97 ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 393.</ref> Its nature is unknown; the etymology<ref name=fx2_ve1_1758> From ''pāka,'' ‘maturity,’ and ''aru = arus,'' ‘sore.’</ref> points to the sense of ‘developed sores,’ ‘ulcers.’

पाङ्क्त्र
<u>'''Pāṅktra'''</u> is the name of an animal mentioned in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], or ‘horse-sacrifice,’ in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1759> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 7;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 26. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 85.</ref> The ‘field-rat’ seems to be meant.

पाञ्च-जन्य
<u>'''Pāñca-janya,'''</u> ‘relating to the five peoples.’ See '''[[पञ्चजनाः|Pañcajanāḥ]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

पाञ्चाल
<u>'''Pāñcāla'''</u> means a ‘king of the [[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]] people,’ and is applied to '''[[दुर्मुख|Durmukha]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1761> viii. 23.</ref> and to '''Śoṇa''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1761> xiii. 5, 4, 7.</ref> The term is also found in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_1761> iii. 29, 1. ''Cf.'' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Anukramaṇī in ''Indische Studien,'' 3 460.</ref> See also '''[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]].''' 

पाञ्चि
<u>'''Pāñci,'''</u> ‘descendant of Pañcan,’ is the name of a teacher mentioned with disapproval in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1762> i. 2, 5, 9;<br> ii. 1, 4, 27. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 434.</ref>

पाटव
<u>'''Pāṭava,'''</u> ‘descendant of Paṭu,’ is a patronymic of '''[[चाक्र|Cākra]]''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xii. 8, 1, 17; 9, 3, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

पाटा
<u>'''Pāṭā'''</u> is mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1764> ii. 27, 4.</ref> and in the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1764> xxxvii. 1;<br> xxxviii. 18. ''Cf.'' Ṛgvidhāna, iv. 12, 1.</ref> It is assumed by the commentator to be identical with the later Pāṭhā, the plant ''Clypea hernandifolia,'' which was much used medicinally, and is still so used at the present day according to Roth.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1764> Quoted in Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 68. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 190;<br> 17, 266;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 305, n. 1;<br> ''Proceedings of the American Oriental Society,'' May, 1885, xlii-xliv.</ref> Very possibly the word should be read as Pāṭhā.

पाणि-घ्न
<u>'''Pāṇi-ghna,'''</u> ‘hand-clapper,’ is enumerated among the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1765> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 20;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 15, 1.</ref> Presumably a man who drives away birds from the fields by making a noise is intended.

पाण्ड्व
<u>'''Pāṇḍva'''</u> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (v. 3, 5, 21) denotes an uncoloured woollen garment.<br>==Foot Notes==

पातल्य
<u>'''Pātalya'''</u> is found in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1767> iii. 53, 17.</ref> meaning some part of the chariot. What it was is quite uncertain. Hopkins<ref name=fx2_ve1_1767> ''Journal of the American Oriental Socicty,'' 13, 242, 243;<br> 20, 224. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 251;<br> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 108.</ref> suggests that, as in the Epic, it was possibly a piece of wood on the axle to hold the pole of the car. 

पात्र
<u>'''Pātra,'''</u> primarily a ‘drinking vessel’ (from ''pā,'' ‘to drink’) denotes a vessel generally both in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1768> i. 82, 4;<br> 110, 5;<br> 162, 13 (to hold the broth from the flesh of the horse);<br> 175, 1;<br> ii. 37, 4;<br> vi. 27, 6, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1768> Av. iv. 17, 4;<br> vi. 142, 1;<br> ix. 6, 17;<br> xii. 3, 25. 36;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 6, 2;<br> vi. 3, 4, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 62;<br> xix. 86. etc.</ref> It was made either of wood<ref name=fx3_ve1_1768> Rv. i. 175, 3.</ref> or clay.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1768> Av. iv. 17, 4.</ref> In some passages<ref name=fx5_ve1_1768> Av. x. 10, 9;<br> xii. 3, 30;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 1, 5;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta Śūtra, xvi. 1, 7, etc.</ref> the word is, according to Roth, used to indicate a measure. The feminine Pātrī occasionally occurs<ref name=fx6_ve1_1768> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 17;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 2, 8;<br> ii. 5, 3, 6;<br> 6, 2, 7;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], v. 8, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 271.</ref> in the sense of ‘vessel.’

पाथ्य
<u>'''Pāthya,'''</u> a word occurring only once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1769> vi. 16, 15. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 4, 2, 4;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 153.</ref> is either an epithet meaning ‘being in heaven’ (''pāthas''), or a patronymic, as Sāyaṇa interprets it, of '''[[वृषन्|Vṛṣan]].'''

पाद
<u>'''1. Pāda'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1770> xiv. 1, 60.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1770> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 5. 12;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 8, 3, 6, etc.;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 5.</ref> denotes the ‘foot’ of an animal, a bird, and other creatures.

पाद
<u>'''2. Pāda,'''</u> as a measure of length, denotes ‘foot’ in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1771> vi. 5, 3, 2;<br> vii. 2, 1, 7;<br> viii. 7, 2, 17;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vi. 10, etc.</ref> The term is occasionally<ref name=fx2_ve1_1771> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 7;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 1, 2.</ref> used to express a measure of weight. As a fraction it means a ‘quarter,’ a sense derived from that of ‘foot’ of a quadruped (just as ''[[शफ|śapha]],'' the divided hoof, comes to mean an ‘eighth’).<br><br>^3) Rv. x. 90, 3. 4.

पाद
<u>'''3. Pāda'''</u> is the regular expression for a ‘quarter verse’ in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1772> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 4;<br> Kauṣīaki [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxvi. 5;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vii. 9;<br> xi. 6;<br> Lāṭyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 2, 1;<br> x. 6, 9, etc.</ref> This sense is merely a limitation of ‘quarter’ = the ‘foot’ of a quadruped 

पान
<u>'''Pāna,'''</u> ‘drink,’ occurs in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1773> xiii. 4, 2, 17.</ref> and the Upaniṣads.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1773> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1, 43;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 2, 7, etc.</ref>

पान्त
<u>'''Pānta'''</u> occurs several times in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1774> i. 122, 1;<br> 155, 1;<br> viii. 92, 1;<br> ix. 65, 28 (a very doubtful passage);<br> x. 88, 1.</ref> apparently<ref name=fx2_ve1_1774> So [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vii. 25;<br> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 122, 123.</ref> meaning ‘drink,’ ‘beverage’ (''cf.'' '''[[पान|Pāna]]'''). Geldner,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1774> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 139;<br> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 108.</ref> however, thinks that in one passage^4 [[पान्त|Pānta]] is the name of a prince.

पान्-नेजन
<u>'''Pān-nejana'''</u> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1775> iii. 8, 2, 1;<br> 9, 3, 27;<br> xiii. 5, 2, 1.</ref> denotes a ‘vessel for washing the feet.’

पाप-यक्ष्म
<u>'''Pāpa-yakṣma.'''</u> See '''[[यक्ष्म|Yakṣma]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

पाप-सम
<u>'''Pāpa-sama,'''</u> a ‘bad season,’ is in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1777> iii. 3, 8, 4. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 342.</ref> opposed to Puṇya-sama, a ‘good season.’

पामन्
<u>'''Pāman'''</u> occurs in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1778> v. 22, 12. ''Cf.'' for the reading, Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 261. See also Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1, 8.</ref> as the name of a skin disease. The derivative adjective, Pāmana, ‘suffering from skin disease,’ is found in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1778> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 3, 8;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiii. 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 1, 31.<br><br>''Cf.'' Grohmann, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 401 ''et seq.;<br>'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 388;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 421, n.;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 450, 451;<br> ''Atharvaveda,'' 63.</ref> Since it is mentioned as an accompaniment of fever, probably a cutaneous eruption or scab consequent on fever is meant.

पायु
<u>'''1. Pāyu,'''</u> meaning ‘guard,’ ‘protector,’ occurs several times in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1779> i. 147, 3;<br> ii. 1, 7;<br> iv. 2, 6;<br> 4, 3. 12;<br> vi. 15, 8;<br> viii. 18, 2;<br> 60, 19;<br> x, 100, 9.</ref> 

पायु
<u>'''2. Pāyu'''</u> is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1780> vi. 47, 24. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 128.</ref> as the name of a poet, a [[भारद्वाज|Bhāradvāja]]. In the Bṛhaddevatā<ref name=fx2_ve1_1780> v. 124 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes.</ref> he is credited with assisting '''[[अभ्यावर्तिन् चायमान|Abhyāvartin Cāyamāna]]''' and '''[[प्रस्तोक|Prastoka]] Sārṅjaya''' by consecrating their weapons with a hymn.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1780> vi. 75 (the ‘battle’ hymn).</ref>

पार
<u>'''Pāra,'''</u> in accordance with its derivation (''pṛ,'' ‘bring across’), denotes the ‘farther bank’ of a river or stream, in which sense<ref name=fx1_ve1_1781> It also often has the generalized sense of ‘extreme limit’ or ‘end,’ as in i. 92, 6 (''tamasas,'' ‘of darkness’);<br> v. 54, 10 (''adhavanaḥ,'' ‘of a road’).</ref> it occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1781> i. 121, 13 (''nāvyānām,'' ‘of streams’);<br> viii. 96, 11 (''nadīnām'');<br> i. 167, 2 (''samudrasya'');<br> x. 155, 3 (''sindhoḥ''), etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1781> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 1, 2. 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiii. 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 6, 2, 4 (''salilasya'');<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 21 (''[[पार|pāra]]-kāma,'' ‘desiring the farther bank’), etc.</ref>

पारशव्य
<u>'''Pāraśavya,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[परशु|Paraśu]],’ is the patronymic of '''[[तिरिन्दिर|Tirindira]]''' in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta Śūtra (xvi. 11, 20). ''Cf.'' '''[[पर्शु|Parśu]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

पारावत
<u>'''1. Pārāvata'''</u> occurs in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’), in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1783> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 25.</ref> meaning ‘turtle-dove.’

पारावत
<u>'''2. Pārāvata'''</u> occurs in several passages of the Rigveda. Roth<ref name=fx1_ve1_1784> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> thinks that in most places<ref name=fx2_ve1_1784> Rv. v. 52, 11;<br> viii. 100, 6;<br> Av. xx. 135, 14;<br> ''[[पारावत|pārāvata]]-ghnī'' of the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]], Rv. vi. 61, 2.</ref> it means ‘coming from a distance,’ but in two passages<ref name=fx3_ve1_1784> Rv. viii. 34, 18;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 4, 11. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 53.</ref> he regards it as the proper name of a people on the '''[[यमुना|Yamunā]]''' (Jumna). It is certain that in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] the Pārāvatas are a people on that river (''cf.'' '''[[तुरश्रवस्|Turaśravas]]'''). Hillebrandt<ref name=fx4_ve1_1784> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 97 ''et seq.;<br>'' 3, 310, following Brunnhofer, ''Iran und Turan,'' 99.</ref> sees in all the passages<ref name=fx5_ve1_1784> See notes 2 and 3.</ref> the name of a people, comparing the  of  Ptolemy,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1784> vi. 20, 3. It is suggested by Hillebrandt that the  of Herodotus, iii. 91, may be the same.</ref> who apparently were settled on the northern border of Gedrosia, or the , who were found in <ref name=fx7_ve1_1784> Ptolemy, vi. 17.</ref> He suggests that they were originally ‘mountaineers’ (''Cf.'' '''[[पर्वत|Parvata]]'''). Ludwig<ref name=fx8_ve1_1784> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 162. 197.</ref> holds a similar view, and Geldner<ref name=fx9_ve1_1784> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 109.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 91;<br> Max Mūller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 316.</ref> recognizes a people as meant. The mention of the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]''' in connexion with the Pārāvatas<ref name=fx2_ve1_1784/> in the Rigveda accords generally with their position on the [[यमुना|Yamunā]] in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve1_1784/>

पाराशरी-कौण्डिनी-पुत्र
<u>'''Pārāśarī-[[कौण्डिनी|kauṇḍinī]]-putra'''</u> is mentioned in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhādāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 4, 30), in the Mādhyaṃdina recension, as a pupil of '''[[गार्गीपुत्र|Gārgīputra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

पाराशरी-पुत्र
<u>'''Pārāśarī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of '''[[पराशर|Parāśara]],'''’ is mentioned in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] as a pupil of '''[[कात्यायनीपुत्र|Kātyāyanīputra]],'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_1786> vi. 5, 1, [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref> of '''[[औपस्वतीपुत्र|Aupasvatīputra]],'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_1786/> of '''[[वात्सीपुत्र|Vātsīputra]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1786> vi. 5, 2, [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref> of '''[[वार्कारुणीपुत्र|Vārkāruṇīputra]],'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1786> vi. 4, 31, Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> and of '''[[गार्गीपुत्र|Gārgīputra]].'''<ref name=fx4_ve1_1786> vi. 4, 30, Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> Different men are no doubt meant.

पाराशर्य
<u>'''Pārāśarya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[पराशर|Parāśara]],'''’ is mentioned in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] as a pupil of '''[[जातूकर्ण्य|Jātūkarṇya]]'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_1787> ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3, [[काण्व|Kāṇva]];<br> ii. 5, 21;<br> iv. 5, 27, Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> or of '''[[भारद्वाज|Bhāradvāja]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1787> ii. 5, 20;<br> iv. 5, 26, Mādhyaṃdina;<br> ii. 6, 2;<br> iv. 6, 2, 3. [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref> A [[पाराशर्य|Pārāśarya]] is also mentioned as a pupil of '''[[बैजवापायन|Baijavāpāyana]],'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1787> ii. 6, 2, [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].<br><br>''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 9, 2.</ref> and '''[[व्यास पाराशर्य|Vyāsa Pārāśarya]]''' is the pupil of '''[[विष्वक्सेन|Viṣvaksena]]''' according to the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] at the end of the Sāmavidhāna [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_1787> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 41. 1.</ref> See also '''Aṣāḍha, [[जयन्त|Jayanta]], Vipaścit, Sudatta.''' 

पाराशर्यायण
<u>'''Pārāśaryāyaṇa'''</u> is mentioned in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1788> ii. 5, 21;<br> iv. 5, 27 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3, [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> as a pupil of [[पाराशर्य|Pārāśarya]].

पारिकुट
<u>'''Pārikuṭa'''</u> is an obscure word--probably corrupt--occurring in a verse cited in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 22, 7), and apparently meaning ‘attendant.’<br>==Foot Notes==

पारिक्षित
<u>'''Pārikṣita,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[परिक्षित्|Parikṣit]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''[[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1790> vii. 27 and 34;<br> viii. 11.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve1_1790> xiii. 5, 4, 1. ''Cf.'' Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 6;<br> ii. 6, 12.</ref> The Pārikṣitīya appear in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1790> xiii. 5, 4, 3.</ref> and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_1790> xvi. 9. 7.</ref> as performers of the horse sacrifice. In a [[गाथा|Gāthā]] there cited they are called Pārikṣitas. Apparently they were the brothers of [[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]], named '''[[उग्रसेन|Ugrasena]], [[भीमसेन|Bhīmasena]],''' and '''[[श्रुतसेन|Śrutasena]].''' In the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx5_ve1_1790> iii. 3, 1.</ref> the question whither they have gone is made the subject of a philosophical discussion. It is clear that the family had passed away before the time of the [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], and it is also clear that there had been some serious scandal mingled with their greatness which they had, in the opinion of the Brahmins, atoned for by their horse sacrifice with its boundless gifts to the priests. Weber<ref name=fx6_ve1_1790> ''Indian Literature,'' 125, 126;<br> 135, 136. The later legend of the Pārikṣitas and Vāmadeva's mares is dealt with by Weber in ''Vedische Beiträge'' (1894).</ref> sees in this the germ of the Epic stories which are recorded in the Mahābhārata.<br><br>The verses relating to [[परिक्षित्|Parikṣit]] in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx7_ve1_1790> xx. 127, 7-10;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 17;<br> Scheftelowitz, ''Die Apokryphen des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 156, 157.</ref> are called Pārikṣityaḥ in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx8_ve1_1790> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 32, 10;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxx. 5;<br> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 12;<br> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 136, n. 144.</ref>

पारि-प्लव
<u>'''Pāri-plava,'''</u> ‘cyclic,’ is a term applied to the '''[[आख्यान|Ākhyāna]],''' or ‘tale,’ which is to be recited at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse  sacrifice’), and to be repeated at intervals throughout the year. It is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1791> xiii. 4, 3, 2. 15.</ref> and in the Sūtras.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1791> Āśvalāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 6;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 1, 26;<br> 2, 36;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 9, 11.</ref>

पारी-णह्य
<u>'''Pārī-ṇahya'''</u> denotes household utensils' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1792> vi. 2, 1, 1.</ref> where it is said that the wife (''[[पत्नी|patnī]]''), as mistress of the house, has charge of all these.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1792> The word occurs '''later''' in the variant form of ''pāri-ṇāhya'' in Manu, ix. 11.</ref>

पारूष्ण
<u>'''Pārūṣṇa,'''</u> occurring in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1793> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 24.</ref> appears to mean some kind of bird.

पारोवर्य-विद्
<u>'''Pārovarya-vid'''</u> in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (xiii. 12) denotes ‘knowers of tradition.’<br>==Foot Notes==

पार्ण-वल्कि
<u>'''Pārṇa-valki,'''</u> ‘descendant of Parṇavalka,’ is the patronymic of '''Nigada''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1795> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372;<br> Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 443.</ref>

पार्थव
<u>'''Pārthava,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[पृथु|Pṛthu]],'''’ occurs once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1796> vi. 27, 8.</ref> where the Pārthavas are mentioned as generous donors. The passage is somewhat obscure, as there is a reference<ref name=fx2_ve1_1796> vi. 27, 7.</ref> to a defeat of the '''Turvaśas''' and the '''Vṛcīvants''' by '''[[सृञ्जय|Sṛñjaya]] [[दैववात|Daivavāta]],''' followed in the next verse by the praise of the bounty to the singer of '''[[अभ्यावर्तिन् चायमान|Abhyāvartin Cāyamāna]],''' who was clearly a '''[[पार्थव|Pārthava]],''' and who, in the earlier part of the hymn, has been referred to as victorious over '''[[वरशिख|Varaśikha]].''' It is uncertain whether, as Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve1_1796> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 133, 134.</ref> suggests, the two princes, Abhyāvartin  [[चायमान|Cāyamāna]] and [[सृञ्जय|Sṛñjaya]] [[दैववात|Daivavāta]], are identical or not.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1796> ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 105.</ref> That [[पार्थव|Pārthava]] has any direct connexion with the Parthians, as held by Brunnhofer, is most improbable.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1796> ''Cf.'' Ludwing, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 196 ''et seq.'' Herodotos, iii. 93, mentions the .</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[पर्शु|Parśu]].'''

पार्थ-श्रवस
<u>'''Pārtha-śravasa,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[पृथु-श्रवस्|Pṛthu-śravas]],’ is found as the name of a demon in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1797> iv. 26, 15. This form of the name is supported by its occurrence in the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 10;<br> xvii. 27. But Pārthu-is also possible.</ref>

पार्थ्य
<u>'''Pārthya,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[पृथि|Pṛthi]],’ is the patronymic of some donor in a hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1798> x. 93. 15.</ref> The form of the name in the Aśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1798> xii. 10. ''Cf.'' the Anukramaṇī on Rv. x. 93.</ref> is Pārtha.

पार्वति
<u>'''Pārvati,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[पर्वत|Parvata]],’ is the patronymic of '''Dakṣa''' in the Śatapatha (ii. 4, 4, 6) and the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] (iv. 4) Brāhmaṇas.<br>==Foot Notes==

पार्षद
<u>'''Pārṣada,'''</u> which first appears in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1800> i. 17. ''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 128 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Studien,'' 3, 269;<br> 4, 217.</ref> denotes a textbook recognized by a school of grammarians.

पार्षद्-वाण
<u>'''Pārṣad-vāṇa,'''</u> ‘descendant of Pṛṣadvāṇa,’ is mentioned as a wonder-worker in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1801> viii. 51, 2. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 139.</ref>

पार्ष्ण शैलन
<u>'''Pārṣṇa Śailana'''</u> is mentioned as a teacher in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ii. 4, 8).<br>==Foot Notes==

पालागल
<u>'''Pālāgala'''</u> occurs in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve1_1803> v. 3, 1, 11. Eggeling;<br> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 64, renders it ‘courier.’</ref> apparently in the sense of ‘messenger,’ or ‘bearer of false news.’ 

पालागली
<u>'''Pālāgalī'''</u> is the name of the fourth and least respected wife of the king.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1804> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 1, 8;<br> 5, 2, 8, etc.</ref> See '''Pati.'''

पावमानी
<u>'''Pāvamānī'''</u> means the verses (''ṛcas'') in the ninth Maṇḍala of the Rigveda ‘relating to Soma Pavamāna’ (‘purifying itself’). The name is found in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1805> xix. 71, 1.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1805> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 20;<br> ii. 37;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xv. 1;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 8, 1, 10;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], xi. 2;<br> xii. 31;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 2, 2, etc.;<br> Maitrāyaṇī [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 14.</ref> possibly even in one hymn of the Rigveda itself.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1805> ix. 67, 31. 32;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 99. n. 3.</ref>

पाश
<u>'''Pāśa'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1806> i. 24, 13. 15;<br> ii. 27, 16;<br> 29, 5. etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1806> Av. ii. 12, 2;<br> ix. 3, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vi. 8. 45, etc.</ref> a ‘rope’ used for fastening or tying up. Rope and knot (''granthi'') are mentioned together in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1806> ix. 3, 2.</ref> [[पाश|Pāśa]] is in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve1_1806> i. 8, 1, 5.</ref> used of the rope by which Manu's ship was fastened to the mountain. It is often employed metaphorically of the ‘fetter’ of Varuṇa.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1806> Rv. vi. 74, 4;<br> vii. 88, 7;<br> x. 85, 24;<br> Av. iv. 16, 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 5, 1, etc.</ref>

पाशिन्
<u>'''Pāśin,'''</u> ‘having a noose,’ denotes a ‘hunter’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1807> iii. 45, 1;<br> ix. 73, 4. So of Nirṛti in [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 10.</ref> and in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1807> xvii. 1, 8.</ref>

पाश-द्युम्न वायत
<u>'''Pāśa-[[द्युम्न|dyumna]] Vāyata'''</u> is the name of a king to whom the '''Vasiṣṭhas''' claim to have been preferred by Indra in one hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1808> vii. 33. 2.</ref> Apparently he was, as Sāyaṇa says, son of Vayat, who may be compared with the '''Vyat of another''' passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1808> i. 122, 4.</ref> Ludwig<ref name=fx3_ve1_1808> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 173.</ref> sees in him a priest of the '''Pṛthus''' and '''Parśus,''' but this is most improbable.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1808> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 130, 139.</ref>

पाष्य
<u>'''Pāṣya'''</u> occurs in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1809> i. 56, 6.</ref> with reference to the defeat of Vṛtra, and apparently denotes ‘stone bulwarks.’  In another passage<ref name=fx2_ve1_1809> ix. 102, 2. ''Cf.'' Macdone, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1893, 457, 458.</ref> the word may mean the stones used for pressing Soma.

पिक
<u>'''Pika,'''</u> the Indian ‘cuckoo,’ is mentioned in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1810> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 15, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 20;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 39. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 92.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[अन्यवाप|Anyavāpa]], Koka.'''

पिङ्गा
<u>'''Piṅgā'''</u> is found in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1811> viii. 69, 9.</ref> where it is explained by the St. Petersburg Dictionary with Sāyaṇa as ‘bowstring,’ but where Hillebrandt<ref name=fx2_ve1_1811> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 144, n.</ref> thinks that a musical instrument of some kind is meant.

पिजवन
<u>'''Pijavana'''</u> is the name of the father of '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]]''' according to the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1812> ii. 24.</ref> Probably this statement is based on a mere conjecture from the epithet [[पैजवन|Paijavana]] used of [[सुदास्|Sudās]] in a verse of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1812> vii. 18, 19. So [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 21.</ref> but may very well be correct.

पिञ्जूल
<u>'''Piñjūla'''</u> denotes a ‘bundle’ of grass or stalks, especially of '''[[दर्भ|Darbha]].''' The word is only found in the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] style.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1813> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiii. 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xviii. 8. It appears in the form of ''piñjula'' in Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 8, 7;<br> Pāraskara [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 15;<br> of [[पुञ्जील|Puñjīla]] in [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 1, 7;<br> 2, 4, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 6, 4;<br> ii. 7, 9, 5.</ref>

पिठीनस्
<u>'''Piṭhīnas'''</u> is the name of a man, a friend of Indra, in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1814> vi. 26, 6. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 156.</ref>

पिण्ड
<u>'''Piṇḍa,'''</u> denoting specifically a ball of flour offered to the Manes, especially on the evening of new moon, occurs in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx1_ve1_1815> iii. 4.</ref> and repeatedly in the Sūtras.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1815> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 10, 4, etc.</ref> 

पिता-पुत्र
<u>'''Pitā-putra,'''</u> ‘father and son,’ is a compound of rare occurrence.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1816> Av. vi. 112, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 2, 4, 4.</ref>

पिता-पुत्रीय
<u>'''Pitā-putrīya'''</u> (‘relating to father and son’), used with Sampradāna (‘handing over’) means the ceremony by which a father, when about to die, bequeathes his bodily and mental powers to his son. It is described in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1817> ii. 15. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 408.</ref>

पिता-मह
<u>'''Pitā-maha,'''</u> beside '''[[ततामह|Tatāmaha]],''' denotes from the Atharvaveda onwards<ref name=fx1_ve1_1818> Av. v. 5, 1;<br> ix. 5, 30;<br> xi. 1, 19;<br> xviii. 4, 35;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 5, 1;<br> vii. 2, 7, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 36;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 5, 4.</ref> the ‘paternal grandfather,’ apparmtly as a ‘father in a higher sense.’<ref name=fx2_ve1_1818> Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 474.</ref> The great-grandfather is '''[[प्रपितामह|Prapitāmaha]]''' and '''[[प्रततामह|Pratatāmaha]].'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1818> Av. xviii. 4, 75.</ref> It is significant that there are no corrésponding Vedic words for maternal grandparents, and that the words used in the latter language, such as Mātāmaha, are imitations of the terms for paternal relations.<br><br>In one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_1818> vi. 20. 11.</ref> Delbrück<ref name=fx5_ve1_1818> ''Ibid.,'' 473.</ref> suggests that ''mahe pitre'' means ‘grandfather,’ a sense which would well suit the ''napātam,'' ‘grandson,’ following, but the sense of the whole passage is uncertain.<ref name=fx6_ve1_1818> See Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 128, n. 1. Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' also doubts the view which is accepted by Delbrück, and denies that in Rv. i. 71, 5, the sense of ‘grandfather’ can be found.</ref><br><br>We learn very little from the texts of the position of grandparents. No doubt they were entitled to marks of respect similar to those shown to parents,<ref name=fx7_ve1_1818> Delbrück, ''op. cit.,'' 480, citing Mahābhārata, ii. 1634.</ref> as the epic expressly testifies. A grandfather might easily be the head of the family, or be living with his eldest son, after he ceased to be able to control the family.<br><br>The grandmother (Pitāmahī) is not mentioned in the extant Vedic literature. 

पितु
<u>'''Pitu'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1819> i. 61, 7;<br> 132, 6;<br> 187, 1;<br> vi. 20, 4, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1819> Av. iv. 6, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 7, 2, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ii. 20;<br> xii. 65;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 13.</ref> has the general sense of ‘nutriment,’ whether food or drink.

पितृ
<u>'''Pitṛ,'''</u> common from the Rigveda onwards, denotes ‘father,’ not so much as the ‘begetter’ (''[[जनितृ|janitṛ]]''),<ref name=fx1_ve1_1820> ''Pitā janitā,'' is used of gods in the Rigveda--''e.g.,'' iv. 17, 12.</ref> but rather as the protector of the child, this being probably also the etymological sense of the word.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1820> As derived from ''pā,'' ‘protect.’ But, as Bo7htlingk and Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Mātar,'' footnote, suggest, ''pa'' and ''mā'' were probably the much older original onomatopoetic names for ‘father’ and ‘mother,’ which in a later reflective age influenced the formation of ''[[पितृ|pitṛ]]'' and ''[[मातृ|mātṛ]]'' (which themselves go back to the Indo-European period).</ref> The father in the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_1820> See, ''e.g.,'' iv. 17, 17;<br> viii. 86, 4.</ref> stands for all that is good and kind. Hence Agni is compared with a father,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1820> Rv. x. 7, 3.</ref> while Indra is even dearer than a father.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1820> Rv. vii. 32, 19;<br> viii. 1, 6.</ref> The father carries his son in his arms,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1820> Rv. i. 38, 1.</ref> and places him on his lap,<ref name=fx7_ve1_1820> Rv. v. 43, 7.</ref> while the child pulls his garment to attract attention.<ref name=fx8_ve1_1820> Rv. iii. 53, 2.</ref> In later years the son depends on his father for help in trouble,<ref name=fx9_ve1_1820> In Rv. x. 48, 1, the ''jantavaḥ'' possibly are the sons.</ref> and greets him with joy.<ref name=fx10_ve1_1820> Rv. vii. 103, 3. ''Cf.'' 1, 24, 1.</ref><br><br>It is difficult to ascertain precisely how far the son was subject to parental control, and how long such control continued. Reference is made in the Rigveda<ref name=fx11_ve1_1820> Rv. ii. 29, 5.</ref> to a father's chastising his son for gambling, and '''[[ऋज्राश्व|Ṛjrāśva]]''' is said to have been blinded by his father.<ref name=fx12_ve1_1820> Rv. i. 116, 16;<br> 117, 17. There is also the case of the sale of Sunaḥśepa, [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 12-18;<br> and ''cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 3, 3.</ref> From the latter statement Zimmer<ref name=fx13_ve1_1820> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 316.</ref> infers the existence of a developed ''patria potestas,'' but to lay stress on this isolated and semi-mythical incident would be unwise. It is, however, quite likely that the ''patria potestas'' was originally strong, for we have other support for the thesis in the Roman ''patria potestas.'' If there is no proof that a father  legally controlled his son's wedding,<ref name=fx14_ve1_1820> ''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 576. ''Ibid.,'' 582, he quotes Mahābhārata, xii. 6108 ''et seq.,'' which refers in one line to the control of the marriage of the son by the father, and in the next to a case of free marriage. The fact is, no doubt, that the son could marry freely, unless his father had arranged matters for him when he was too young to object.</ref> and not much that he controlled his daughter's,<ref name=fx15_ve1_1820> Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 309, assumes this as certain, but it is far from proved. See, however, Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 12, 2, which is in favour of Zimmer's view. ''Cf.'' Kaegi, ''Dev Rigveda,'' 15, and '''Pati.'''</ref> the fact is in itself not improbable.<br><br>There is again no evidence to show whether a son, when grown up, normally continued to stay with his father, his wife becoming a member of the father's household, or whether he set up a house of his own: probably the custom varied. Nor do we know whether the son was granted a special plot of land on marriage or otherwise, or whether he only came into such property after his father's death. But any excessive estimate of the father's powers over a son who was no longer a minor and naturally under his control, must be qualified by the fact that in his old age the sons might divide their father's property,<ref name=fx16_ve1_1820> Rv. i. 70, 10;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 14;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 156 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 26, 61, 62).</ref> or he might divide it amongst them,<ref name=fx17_ve1_1820> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 9, 4-6. ''Cf.'' the handing over from father to son in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 15. If the father recovered, he lived subject to his son.</ref> and that when the father-in-law became aged he fell under the control of his son's wife.<ref name=fx18_ve1_1820> Rv. x. 85, 46.</ref> There are also obscure traces that in old age a father might be exposed, though there is no reason to suppose that this was usual in Vedic India.<ref name=fx19_ve1_1820> ''Cf.'' Rv. viii. 51, 2;<br> Av. xviii. 2, 34. The first passage need not refer to exposure, and the second merely refers to the exposure of a dead body;<br> but Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 326-328, thinks that they prove exposure. ''Cf.'' '''[[धर्म|Dharma]].'''</ref><br><br>Normally the son was bound to give his father full obedience.<ref name=fx20_ve1_1820> Rv. i. 68, 5</ref> The later Sūtras show in detail the acts of courtesy which he owed his father, and they allow him to eat the remnants of his father's food.<ref name=fx21_ve1_1820> Āpastamba [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 1, 4, 11.</ref> On the other hand, the father was expected to be kind. The story of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Brāh-  maṇa<ref name=fx22_ve1_1820> vii. 12 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 17 ''et seq.''</ref> emphasizes the horror with which the father's heartless treatment of his son was viewed. The Upaniṣads<ref name=fx23_ve1_1820> ''E.g.,'' [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 15;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 5, 25 (Mādhyaṃdina = i. 5, 17, [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> insist on the spiritual succession from father to son. The kissing of a son<ref name=fx24_ve1_1820> See Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 28, 120-134;<br> Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 26, n. 3.</ref> was a frequent and usual token of affection, even in mature years.<br><br>On the failure of natural children, adoption was possible.<ref name=fx25_ve1_1820> ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 318;<br> Mayr, ''Indisches Erbrecht,'' 73;<br> Jolly, ''Die Adoption in Indien'' (Würzburg, 1910), 7 ''et seq.''</ref> It was even resorted to when natural children existed, but when it was desired to secure the presence in the family of a person of specially high qualifications, as in Viśvāmitra's adoption of [[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]].<ref name=fx26_ve1_1820> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 17 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 17. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 157.</ref> It is not clear that adoption from one caste into another was possible, for there is no good evidence that [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] was, as Weber<ref name=fx27_ve1_1820> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 33, 34.</ref> holds, a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] who adopted a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. Adoption was also not always in high favour: it may be accidental or not that a hymn of the [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] book of the Rigveda<ref name=fx28_ve1_1820> vii. 4, 7. 8.</ref> condemns the usage. It was also possible for the father who had a daughter, but no sons, to appoint her to bear a son for him. At any rate the practice appears to be referred to in an obscure verse of the Rigveda<ref name=fx29_ve1_1820> iii. 31, 1.</ref> as interpreted by [[यास्क|Yāska]].<ref name=fx30_ve1_1820> iii. 5 ''ad fin. Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 343;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 34;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 239-241.</ref> Moreover, it is possible that the difficulty of a brotherless maiden finding a husband<ref name=fx31_ve1_1820> ''Cf.'' '''[[भ्रातृ|Bhrātṛ]].'''</ref> may have been due in part to the possibility of her father desiring to make her a [[पुत्रिका|Putrikā]], the later technical name for a daughter whose son is to belong to her father's family.<br><br>There can be no doubt that in a family the father took precedence of the mother.<ref name=fx32_ve1_1820> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 1, 18;<br> a citation in [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 9;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] vii. 15, 2.</ref> Delbrück<ref name=fx33_ve1_1820> ''Die indogermanischen'' Verwandtschaftsnamen, 577.</ref> explains away the apparent cases to the contrary.<ref name=fx34_ve1_1820> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 7, 5. Some passages in the Sūtras present difficulties, but they are of no importance for Vedic times proper.</ref> There is no trace of the  family as a land-owning corporation.<ref name=fx35_ve1_1820> Baden Powell, whose various works (''Indian Village Community,'' 1896;<br> ''Village Communities in India,'' 1899, etc.) have done most to combat the view of the village community in India as a land-holding institution, is prepared to recognize the family as a land-owning unit, considering that the ''patria potestas'' is a later growth, and not Indian (see, ''e.g., Village Communities in India,'' 128 ''et seq.''). Hopkins, ''India, Old and New,'' 218 ''et seq.,'' adopts a theory which allows of individual and joint family ownership side by side, the latter being apparently the earlier but the decadent stage. He expressly considers (p. 222) that the son had an indefeasible right to prevent the father from alienating the hereditary land, which could only be parted with by the consent of the village if it were a case of joint ownership (''cf.'' the verse cited by Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 94). But it must be remembered that, as is very clearly shown in the case of English law by Pollock and Maitland (''History of English Law,'' 2, 337-352), the recognition of the rights of sons may well be, not a sign of original joint or family ownership, but a development from the existence of intestate succession, and as in England, so in India, there is no trace of a corporate joint family in the early books. And, as Jolly (''op. cit.,'' 76, 80) shows, there are clear traces, both in old and modern times, of a despotic control of the family by the father even after his sons grew up, provided only that he was physically able to control them. The same state of affairs seems proved for early English law, as it is beyond question for Roman law (see Smith's ''Dictionary of Antiquities,'' 2, 351 ''et seq.''). In Greece also, which is sometimes contrasted with Rome, there is the clearest trace of both a real ''patria potestas,'' and of the absolute ownership of the land by the father as against the son, especially in the archaic laws of Gortyn (see Gardner and Jevons, ''Greek Antiquities,'' 404, 405, 563, 566).</ref> The dual form Pitarau regularly means ‘father and mother,’ ‘parents.’<ref name=fx36_ve1_1820> Rv. i. 20, 4;<br> 160, 3;<br> ii. 17, 7;<br> vii. 67, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiii 10;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 11, etc.</ref>

पितृ-याण
<u>'''Pitṛ-yāṇa,'''</u> the ‘way of the fathers,’ mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1821> x. 2, 7. ''Cf.'' the allusion to it in x. 18, 1, as other than the Devavāna, which appears in x. 98, 11.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1821> Av. viii. 10, 19;<br> xii. 2, 10, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 45;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 3, 2, etc.</ref> is opposed to the Deva-[[यान|yāna]], or ‘way of the gods.’ Tilak<ref name=fx3_ve1_1821> ''Orion,'' 22 ''et seq.''</ref> considers that the Devayāna corresponds with the Uttarāyaṇa, ‘northern journey’ of the sun, and the [[पितृयाण|Pitṛyāṇa]] with the [[दक्षिणायन|Dakṣiṇāyana]], its ‘southern journey.’ He concludes from a passage of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx4_ve1_1821> ii. 1, 3, 1-3.</ref> where three of the seasons--spring, summer, and the rains--are ascribed to the gods, but the others to the Pitṛs, or Fathers, that the Devayāna began with the vernal equinox, and the [[पितृयाण|Pitṛyāṇa]] with the autumnal equinox. With this he connects the curious  distinction of Deva- and Yama-Nakṣatras in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx5_ve1_1821> i. 5, 2, 6.</ref> These conclusions are, however, very improbable. ''Cf.'' '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]]''' and '''[[सूर्य|Sūrya]].'''

पितृ-हन्
<u>'''Pitṛ-han,'''</u> ‘parricide,’ is found in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1822> ix. 4, 3. ''Cf.'' Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> Paippalāda recension.

पित्र्य
<u>'''Pitrya'''</u> occurs in the list of sciences given in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1823> vii. 1, 2, 4;<br> 2, 1;<br> 7, 1. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 267;<br> Little, ''Grammatical Index,'' 98.</ref> Apparently it is to be taken as the science relating to the cult of the Manes, as explained by Śaṅkara in his commentary. As it is in that list followed by '''Rāśi,''' the St. Petersburg Dictionary is inclined to take [[पित्र्य|Pitrya]] Rāśi as one expression, but in what exact sense does not appear.

पित्व
<u>'''Pitva'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve1_1824> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 17, 1.</ref> or '''Pidva'''<ref name=fx2_ve1_1824> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 13;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 32. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 79;<br> Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 29, 290.</ref> is the name of an animal included in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās. According to the commentator on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1824/> it means ‘lion.’ But it may be identical with '''[[पेत्व|Petva]].'''

पिनाक
<u>'''Pināka,'''</u> ‘club,’ is found in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1825> i. 27, 2.</ref> Later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1825> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 6, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 61;<br> xvi. 51. etc.</ref> it is used to denote the club of Rudra-[[शिव|Śiva]].

पिन्वन
<u>'''Pinvana'''</u> occurs in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiv. 1, 2, 17; 2, 1, 11; 3, 1, 22) as the name of a vessel used in the ritual.<br>==Foot Notes==

पिपील
<u>'''Pipīla,'''</u> ‘ant,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda (x. 16, 6) as eating the flesh of the dead. <br>==Foot Notes==

पिपीलिका
<u>'''Pipīlikā'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1828> vii. 56, 7. ''Cf.'' xx. 134. 6.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1828> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 6, 7;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], v. 6, 10;<br> xv. 17, 8;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 4, 9. 29 (Mādhyaṃdina = i. 4, 4, 16 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vii. 13;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 3, 8;<br> ii. 1, 6.</ref> denotes an ‘ant,’ the form of the word referring doubtless not so much to the small species of ant, as it is taken in the later lexicons,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1828> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> but rather to the insect's tiny size, which would naturally be expressed by a diminutive formation of the name. The form Pipīlaka<ref name=fx4_ve1_1828> ''Cf. kanīnaka'' beside ''kanīnikā,'' ‘pupil of the eye.’</ref> is found in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx5_ve1_1828> vii. 2, 1;<br> 7, 1;<br> 8, 1;<br> 10, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 97;<br> Edgerton, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 31, 128.</ref>

पिप्पका
<u>'''Pippakā'''</u> is mentioned in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] '''Saṃhitās.'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_1829> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 19, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 21;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 40. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 93.</ref> Some bird seems to be meant.

पिप्पल
<u>'''Pippala,'''</u> n., is found in two passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1830> i. 164, 20 = Muṇḍaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 1, 1;<br> Śvetāśvatara [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 6, 22;<br> v. 54, 12 (the ‘berry’ of heaven, ''[[नाक|nāka]]'').</ref> meaning ‘berry,’ used with a mystic signification, and in neither case with any certain reference to the berry of the fig-tree.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1830> The word [[पिप्पल|Pippala]] appears in the later literature as a masculine, denoting the ''Ficus veligiosa'' ('''[[अश्वत्थ|Aśvattha]]''' in Vedic literature).</ref> In the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1830> iv. 1, 41.</ref> the general sense of ‘berry’ is not necessary, and the special sense of ‘berry’ of the Peepal is quite possible: the latter meaning is perhaps intended in the Satapatha Brāhmana.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1830> iii. 7, 1, 12.</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx5_ve1_1830> vi. 109, 1, 2.</ref> the feminine form of the word, Pippalī, appears denoting berries used as a remedy for wounds, like '''[[अरुन्धती|Arundhatī]].'''<ref name=fx6_ve1_1830> Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 61;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 516;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 359, 360;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 389;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 331.</ref> 

पिप्पलाद
<u>'''Pippalāda'''</u> (‘eater of berries’) is the name of a teacher mentioned in the [[प्रश्न|Praśna]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1831> i. 1.</ref> In the plural the name denotes a school of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1831> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 277;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 153, 159, 160, 164.</ref> Their (Paippalāda) recension of the text of the Saṃhitā has been reproduced in facsimile by Garbe and Bloomfield,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1831> Baltimore, 1901.</ref> and in part published.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1831> The variants of the Paippalāda are given in part in Whitney's Translation of the Atharvaveda, and the text of books i. and ii. has been edited by Barret in the ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 26, 197-295;<br> 30, 187 ''et seq. Cf.'' also Lanman in Whitney's Translation, lxxix ''et seq.''</ref>

पिप्रु
<u>'''Pipru'''</u> is the name of a foe of Indra in the Rigveda. He was repeatedly defeated by Indra for '''[[ऋजिश्वन्|Ṛjiśvan]].'''<ref name=fx1_ve1_1832> i. 101, 1, 2;<br> iv. 16, 13;<br> v. 29, 11;<br> vi. 20, 7;<br> viii. 49, 10;<br> x. 99, 11;<br> 138, 3. In i. 103, 8;<br> ii. 14, 5;<br> vi. 18, 8, the reference is general to a defeat of [[पिप्रु|Pipru]] by Indra.</ref> Mentioned as possessing forts,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1832> Rv. i. 51, 5;<br> vi. 20, 7.</ref> he is called a [[दास|Dāsa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1832> Rv. viii. 32, 2.</ref> as well as an Asura.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1832> Rv. x. 138, 3.</ref> He is described as having a black brood,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1832> Rv. i. 101, 1.</ref> and as being allied with blacks.<ref name=fx6_ve1_1832> iv. 16, 13.</ref> It is uncertain whether he was a demon, according to Roth's<ref name=fx7_ve1_1832> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> view, which is favoured by the use of the word Asura, or a human foe, as Ludwig,<ref name=fx8_ve1_1832> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 149.</ref> Oldenberg,<ref name=fx9_ve1_1832> ''Religion des Veda,'' 155.</ref> and Hillebrandt<ref name=fx10_ve1_1832> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 273.<br><br>''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 161 (C).</ref> believe. The name may mean ‘resister,’ from the root ''pṛ.''

पिश
<u>'''Piśa'''</u> is found in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1833> i. 64, 8. ''Cf.'' Av. xix. 49, 4;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 83;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 118;<br> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 110.</ref> where '''Sāyaṇa''' takes it to mean a deer (''ruru'').

पिशङ्ग
<u>'''Piśaṅga'''</u> is the name of one of the two Unnetṛ priests officiating at the snake festival mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1834> xxv. 15, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 35.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Caka.''' 

पिशाच
<u>'''Piśāca'''</u> is the name of a class of demon mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1835> ii. 18, 4;<br> iv. 20, 6. 9;<br> 36, 4;<br> 37, 10;<br> v. 29, 4. 5. 14;<br> vi. 32, 2;<br> viii. 2, 12;<br> xii. 1, 50. The word occurs once in the Rv. (i. 133, 5) in the form of Piśāci.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1835> See St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve1_1835> ii. 4, 1, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 14.</ref> they are associated with Rakṣases and Asuras, while opposed to gods, men, and fathers. In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_1835> v. 25, 9.</ref> they are described as ''kravyād,'' ‘eaters of raw flesh,’ which may be the etymological sense of the word [[पिशाच|Piśāca]] itself.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1835> ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 264, n.</ref> It is possible that the Piśācas were, as suggested by Grierson,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1835> ''Cf.'' Grierson, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1905, 285-288. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 164 (B).</ref> really human foes, like the north-western tribes, who even in later times were reputed eaters of raw flesh (not necessarily as cannibals, but rather as eaters of human flesh in ritual). This is, however, not at all likely, the Piśācas having in all probability only meant ‘ghouls’ originally: when they appear as human tribes, they were presumably thus designated in scorn. A science called Piśācaveda<ref name=fx7_ve1_1835> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. i. 1, 10.</ref> or [[पिशाच|Piśāca]]-[[विद्या|vidyā]]<ref name=fx8_ve1_1835> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 7, 6.</ref> is known in the later Vedic period.

पिशित
<u>'''Piśita'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1836> v. 19, 5.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1836> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 11;<br> [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 8;<br> xxxv. 18;<br> xxxix. 14. etc.</ref> denotes raw flesh (''of.'' '''[[पिशाच|Piśāca]]'''). In one passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve1_1836> vi. 127, 1. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 531;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 376.</ref> the sense seems to be ‘small piece,’ ‘bit,’ but the St. Petersburg Dictionary suggests that [[पिशित|Piśita]] here stands for ''piṣita,'' equivalent to ''[[पिष्ट|piṣṭa]]'' (what is ‘pounded,’ then ‘particle’).

पिशील
<u>'''Piśīla'''</u> is found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ii. 5, 3, 6) as the name of a wooden vessel or dish. In the Lāṭyāyana Śrautā [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (iv. 2, 4. 5) a [[पिशील|Piśīla]]-[[वीणा|vīṇā]] is mentioned, which seems to have been a kind of guitar, with strings stretched over a body of wood. <br>==Foot Notes==

पिशुन
<u>'''Piśuna,'''</u> ‘traitor,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1838> vii. 104, 20.</ref> and occasionally later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1838> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 13;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vii. 6, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 7, 1.</ref>

पिष्ट
<u>'''Piṣṭa'''</u> (‘pounded’), n., ‘meal,’ ‘flour,’ is mentioned in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1839> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 9;<br> Śatapatha Brāhṃaṇa, i. 1, 4, 3;<br> 2, 1, 2;<br> vi. 5, 1, 6, etc.</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1839> xii. 2, 53.</ref> reference is made to pounded beans (''māṣāḥ'').

पीठ
<u>'''Pīṭha,'''</u> ‘stool,’ does not occur as an uncompounded word before the Sūtras, but the compound ''[[पीठ|pīṭha]]-sarpin'' (‘moving about in a little cart’) is found as the designation of a ‘cripple’ in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā (xxx. 21) and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 4, 17, 1) in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’).<br>==Foot Notes==

पीतु-दारु
<u>'''Pītu-dāru'''</u> is found in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1841> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxv. 6.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1841> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 2, 15;<br> xiii. 4, 4, 5, 17;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxiv. 13, 5.</ref> denoting the Deodar (''deva-[[दारु|dāru]]'') tree, or, according to others, the '''[[खदिर|Khadira]]''' or '''[[उदुम्बर|Udumbara]]''' tree.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1841> Mahīdhara on Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, v. 14;<br> Sāyaṇa on [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 28.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Pūtadru.'''

पीयूष
<u>'''Pīyūṣa'''</u> is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1842> ''Cf.'' ii. 35, 5, where it is applied figuratively to the mothers of Agni.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1842> [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xix. 15. ''Cf.'' Av. viii. 9, 24.</ref> in the sense of the first milk of the cow after calving, ‘biestings.’ Usually the term is applied metaphorically to the sap of the Soma plant.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1842> Rv. ii. 13, 1;<br> iii. 48, 2;<br> vi. 47, 4;<br> x. 94, 8, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 110.</ref>

पीला
<u>'''Pīlā'''</u> occurs once in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1843> iv. 37, 3. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 69;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 211.</ref> as the name of an  Apsaras, being no doubt originally a name of some fragrant  plant, like '''Naladī''' and '''Guggulū,''' two other names of Apsarases given in the same verse.

पीलु
<u>'''Pīlu'''</u> is the name in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1844> xx. 135, 12. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 62;<br> Weber, ''Transactions of the Berlin Academy,'' 1895, 861.</ref> of a tree (''Careya arborea'' or ''Salvadora persica'') on the fruit of which doves fed.

पीलुमती
<u>'''Pīlumatī'''</u> is in the Atharvaveda (xviii. 2, 48) the name of the intermediate heaven lying between the ''udanuvatī,'' ‘watery,’ and the ''pra-dyauḥ,'' ‘farthest heaven.’ It presumably means ‘rich in '''[[पीलु|Pīlu]].'''’ ''Cf.'' '''Div.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

पुंश्-चली
<u>'''Puṃś-calī'''</u> (‘running after men’) is found in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1846> xxx. 22.</ref> the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1846> xv. 2, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> and later,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1846> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 1, 10;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxvii. 1;<br> Lāṭyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 3, 9, 11.</ref> to denote a ‘wanton woman.’ In the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx4_ve1_1846> xxx. 5. 20;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 1, 1;<br> 15, 1;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 3, 6.</ref> also occurs the form Puṃścalū. See also '''[[धर्म|Dharma]]''' and '''Pati.'''

पुं-सवन
<u>'''Puṃ-savana'''</u> (‘male-production’ ceremony) is found in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1847> vi. 11, 1.</ref> in a hymn which is obviously intended to accompany a rite aiming at securing the birth of a male child and which is so applied in the ritual.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1847> [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxxv. 8. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 460;<br> whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 288. The later [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] ritual knows a special rite called [[पुंसवन|Puṃsavana]]. See Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 13;<br> Sāṅkhāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 20;<br> Gobhila [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 6, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' Hillebrandt, ''Rituallitteratur,'' 41.</ref>

पुक्लक
<u>'''Puklaka.'''</u> See '''[[पौल्कस|Paulkasa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

पुञ्जि-ष्ठ
<u>'''Puñji-ṣṭha'''</u> is found in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve1_1849> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 27;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 4, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 13.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1849> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 7;<br> Pāṇini, viii. 3, 97.</ref> apparently meaning ‘fisherman,’ though Mahīdhara<ref name=fx3_ve1_1849> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 27.</ref> explains it as ‘bird-catcher.’ ''Cf.'' '''[[पौञ्जिष्ठ|Pauñjiṣṭha]].''' 

पुञ्जील
<u>'''Puñjīla'''</u> is found in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve1_1850> vi. 1, 1, 7;<br> 2, 4, 3.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve1_1850> i. 7, 6, 4;<br> ii. 7, 9, 5.</ref> in the sense of a ‘bundle’ of grass, being a variant of '''[[पिञ्जूल|Piñjūla]].'''

पुण्डरीक
<u>'''Puṇḍarīka'''</u> denotes the blossom of the lotus in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1851> x. 142, 8.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1851> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 2, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 5, 6;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 3, 10;<br> vi. 3, 14;<br> Chāndogya Upaṇiṣad, i. 6, 7;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 4.</ref> The [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve1_1851> xviii. 9, 6.</ref> states that the lotus flower is born of the light of the Nakṣatras, and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx4_ve1_1851> x. 8, 43;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 1, 1.</ref> compares the human heart to the lotus.<ref name=fx5_ve1_1851> In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 18, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 2, 1, ''puṇḍari-srajā'' denotes a ‘wreath of lotus leaves.’<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 71.</ref>

पुण्ड्र
<u>'''Puṇḍra'''</u> is the name of a people regarded as outcasts in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve1_1852> vii. 18;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 26.</ref> Their name occurs in the Sūtras also.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1852> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 2, 14, ''Cf.'' Caland, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 56, 553;<br> Būhler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 14, 148;<br> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 394, n. For the later geographical position of the Puṇḍras, ''cf.'' the map in Pargiter, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 333.</ref> In the Epic their country corresponds with Bengal and Bihar.

पुत्र
<u>'''Putra'''</u> is, with '''[[सूनु|Sūnu]],''' the usual name for ‘son’ from the Rigveda onwards.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1853> Rv. ii. 29, 5;<br> v. 47, 6;<br> vi. 9, 2, etc.;<br> Av. iii. 30, 2, etc.</ref> The original sense of the word was apparently ‘small,’ or something analogous.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1853> Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 454.</ref> The form Putraka<ref name=fx3_ve1_1853> Rv. viii. 69, 8;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 14;<br> vi. 33 (here the narrative uses [[पुत्र|Putra]];<br> the reported words have Putraka);<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 6, 1, 2;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 21, etc.</ref> is often used with the distinct intention of an affectionate address to a younger man, not merely a son proper. Reference is frequently made to the desire for a son.<ref name=fx4_ve1_1853> Rv. x. 183, 1;<br> Av. vi. 81, 3;<br> xi. 1, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 6, 1;<br> vii. 1, 8, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 9, 1.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Pati.''' 

पुत्र-सेन
<u>'''Putra-sena'''</u> is the name of a man in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (iv. 6, 6).<br>==Foot Notes==

पुत्रिका
<u>'''Putrikā'''</u> in the later literature<ref name=fx1_ve1_1855> [[मानव|Mānava]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] Śāstra, ix. 127 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxviii. 20;<br> [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvii. 17.</ref> has the technical sense of the daughter of a man without sons, whom he gives in marriage on the express terms that her son shall perform the funeral rites for him, and be counted as his. The thing as well as the name is recognized by [[यास्क|Yāska]] in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx2_ve1_1855> iii. 5 ''ad fin.''</ref> and traced to the Rigveda.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1855> i. 124, 7. ''Cf.'' iii. 31, 1.</ref> But the passages in the Rigveda are of very uncertain meaning,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1855> ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 34;<br> ''Rigveda, Kommentar,'' 48, 49;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 239 ''et seq.;<br>'' Roth, ''[[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],' Erlāuterungen,'' 27;<br> Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 72, 73;<br> Bṛhaddevatā, iv. 110. 111, with Macdonell's note;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1910, 924, 925;<br> Jolly, ''Die Adoption in Indien,'' 32.</ref> and in all probability do not refer to this custom at all.

पुनर्-दत्त
<u>'''Punar-datta'''</u> (‘given again’) is the name of a teacher in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka (viii. 8).<br>==Foot Notes==

पुनर्-भू
<u>'''Punar-bhū'''</u> is found in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1857> ix. 5, 28. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 537.</ref> meaning a wife who marries again, a rite being mentioned by which she can ensure reunion with her second (not her first) husband in the next world.

पुनर्-वसु
<u>'''Punar-vasu'''</u> (‘bringing goods again’), used in the dual, denotes the fifth in the series of the Vedic '''Nakṣatras,''' or ‘Lunar Mansions.’ Roth<ref name=fx1_ve1_1858> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> takes the word to have this sense in its only occurrence in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1858> x. 19, 1.</ref> but this must be regarded as decidedly doubtful. The term is, however, found in the ordinary lists of the Nakṣatras in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1858> Av. xix. 7, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 5, 1, 4;<br> iv. 4, 10, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 2, 3;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, viii. 15;<br> xxxix. 13;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 2, 10, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 289, 290;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 355.</ref> 

पुनः-सर
<u>'''Punaḥ-sara,'''</u> ‘recurrent,’ is the epithet of the barking dog in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1859> vii. 55, 3;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 56, n. 1.</ref> which is told to bark at the thief. It refers, not doubt, to the dog's practice of running to and fro when it barks. It is also applied to a plant, '''[[अपामार्ग|Apāmārga]]''' (''Achyranthes aspera''), in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1859> iv. 17, 2;<br> vi. 129, 3;<br> x. 1, 9. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 179. Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 394, prefers the sense of ‘attacking,’ which is the meaning of ''[[प्रति-सर|prati-sara]],'' Av. viii. 5, 5. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2, 4, 20.</ref> with the sense of ‘having revertent leaves.’

पुमांस्
<u>'''Pumāṃs'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1860> i. 124, 7;<br> 162, 22;<br> iii. 29, 13;<br> iv. 3, 10, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve1_1860> Av. iii. 6, 1;<br> 23, 3;<br> iv. 4, 4;<br> vi. 11, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, viii. 5, etc.</ref> man as the ‘male.’ It has no special reference to marriage like '''Pati,''' or to heroism like '''[[नृ|Nṛ]]''' or '''Nara.''' In grammar it denotes the masculine gender.<ref name=fx3_ve1_1860> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 8;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 1, 1, 8;<br> 5, 1, 3;<br> ''Cf.'' iv. 5, 2, 10, and ''puṃṣā nakṣatreṇa,'' ‘a [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] with a masculine name,’ in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 3, 1.</ref>

पुर्
<u>'''Pur'''</u> is a word of frequent occurrence in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1861> i. 53, 7, 58, 8;<br> 131, 4;<br> 166, 8;<br> iii. 15, 4;<br> iv. 27, 1, etc.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1861> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 7, 5;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 23;<br> ii. 11;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 4, 3;<br> vi. 3, 3, 25;<br> xi. 1, 1, 2, 3;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 5, 3, etc.</ref> meaning ‘rampart,’ ‘fort,’ or ‘stronghold.’ Such fortifications must have been occasionally of considerable size, as one is called ‘broad’ (''pṛthvī'') and ‘wide’ (''urvī'').<ref name=fx3_ve1_1861> i. 189, 2.</ref> Elsewhere<ref name=fx4_ve1_1861> Rv. iv. 30, 20. Perhaps sun-dried bricks are alluded to by ''āmā'' (lit. ‘raw,’ ‘unbaked’) in Rv. ii. 35, 6.</ref> a fort ‘made of stone’ (''aśmamayī'') is mentioned. Sometimes strongholds ‘of iron’ (''āyasī'') are referred to,<ref name=fx5_ve1_1861> Rv. i. 58, 8;<br> ii. 20, 8;<br> iv. 27, 1. vii. 3, 7;<br> 15, 4;<br> 95, 1;<br> x. 101, 8. See Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 2^2, 378 ''et seq.''</ref> but these are probably only metaphorical. A fort ‘full of kine’ (''[[गोमती|gomatī]]'') is mentioned,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1861> Av. viii. 6, 23.</ref> showing that strongholds were used to hold cattle. ‘Autumnal’ (''śāradī'') forts are named, apparently as belonging to the '''Dāsas:''' this may refer to the forts in that season being  occupied against Āryan attacks or against inundations caused by overflowing rivers. Forts ‘with a hundred walls’ (''śatabhuji'') are spoken of.<ref name=fx7_ve1_1861> Rv. i. 166, 8;<br> vii. 15, 14.</ref><br><br>It would probably be a mistake to regard these forts as premanently occupied fortified places like the fortresses of the mediæval barony. They were probably merely places of refuge against attack, ramparts of hardened earth with palisades and a ditch (''cf.'' '''[[देही|Dehī]]'''). Pischel and Geldner,<ref name=fx8_ve1_1861> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, xxii, xxiii, where ''[[क्षिति|kṣiti]] [[ध्रुवा|dhruvā]],'' i. 73, 4, is compared.</ref> however, think that there were towns with wooden walls and ditches ( and) like the Indian town of Pāṭaliputra known to Megasthenes<ref name=fx9_ve1_1861> Strabo, p. 702;<br> Arrian, ''Indica,'' 10.</ref> and the Pāli texts.<ref name=fx10_ve1_1861> Mahāparinibbānasutta, p. 12.  ''Cf.'' Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 262.</ref> This is possible, but hardly susceptible of proof, and it is not without significance that the word '''[[नगर|Nagara]]''' is of late occurrence. On the whole it is hardly likely that in early Vedic times city life was much developed. In the Epic, according to Hopkins,<ref name=fx11_ve1_1861> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 77;<br> 174 ''et seq.''</ref> there are found the [[नगर|Nagara]], ‘city’; '''[[ग्राम|Grāma]],''' ‘village’; and [[घोष|Ghoṣa]], ‘ranch.’ Vedic literature hardly seems to go beyond the village, no doubt with modifications in its later period.<br><br>The siege of forts is mentioned in the Saṃhitās and Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx12_ve1_1861> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 3, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 23;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 4, 3-5;<br> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 7, etc.</ref> According to the Rigveda,<ref name=fx13_ve1_1861> vii. 5, 3. Possibly, in some cases, the palisade was no more than a hedge of thorn or a row of stakes (''cf.'' Rv. x. 101, 8), as suggested by Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 143, 145;<br> and ''cf.'' Rv. viii. 53, 5, as corrected by Roth, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 109.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 142148, who compares the fact that neither the Germans (Tacitus, ''Germania,'' 16) nor the Slavs (Procopius, ''De bello Gotico,'' iii. 14) lived in towns, but, like the ancient Indians, were scattered in villages, each consisting of the houses and steadings of the several families living in the village. The evidence seems pretty convincing. It is true that the Greeks, when we first find them, evidently knew castles and fortresses of the mediæval type;<br> but the Greeks were clearly an invading race, superimposed on an older and in civilization more advanced people (see, ''e.g.,'' Burrows, ''Discoveries in Crete''). But the Pur may, as Zimmer allows, have sometimes been built within the limits of the village. Whether, as he urges (144), the ''śāradī pur'' was a protection against the floods of antumn is uncertain. ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 131, 4;<br> 174, 2;<br> vi. 20, 10. In particular, it is not legitimate to connect the mention of those forts with the fact that the Pūrus lived on either side of the [[सिन्धु|Sindhu]] (Indus), and to assume that Purukutsa's attack on the aborigines was directed against the forts in which they normally protected themselves on the rising of the river. No argument for the large size of cities can be drawn from the mention in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 1, of ''ekādaśa-dvāra'' as an epithet of Pura (''cf.'' Śvetāśvatara Upaniśad, iii. 18;<br> ''nava-dvāra pura,'' ‘the citadel of nine doors’), because it is used metaphorically of the body, and the number of doors depends on the nature of the body (Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 185). The evidence of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 1, 1, 2, 3, seems rather to point to only one gate in a city.<br><br>''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 412;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 451;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 229;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 203, and '''Mahāpur.'''</ref> fire was used. 

पुरं-धि
<u>'''Puraṃ-dhi'''</u> occurs in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1862> i. 116, 13. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 398.</ref> possibly as the name of a woman, a protégée of the Aśvins, who gave her a son, '''[[हिरण्यहस्त|Hiraṇyahasta]].'''

पुरय
<u>'''Puraya'''</u> is the name of a patron celebrated in a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’) in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1863> vi. 63, 9. ''Cf.'' Ludwing, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 158.</ref>

पुराण
<u>'''1. Purāṇa,'''</u> denoting a tale ‘of olden times,’ is often found<ref name=fx1_ve1_1864> Satāpatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 6, 8;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 4, 1. 2;<br> vii. 1, 2. 4;<br> 2, 1;<br> 7, 1.</ref> in the combination [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]]-[[पुराण|Purāṇa]], which is probably a Dvandva compound meaning ‘'''[[इतिहास|Itihāsa]]''' and [[पुराण|Purāṇa]].’ It sometimes<ref name=fx2_ve1_1864> Av. xv. 6, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 3, 13;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii 4, 10;<br> iv. 1, 2;<br> 5, 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 9;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 53;<br> [[पुराण|Purāṇa]]-veda: [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 2, 27;<br> Purāṇavidyā: Āśvalāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 7, etc.</ref> occurs as a separate word, but beside [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]], no doubt with the same sense as in the Dvandva. Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx3_ve1_1864> Introduction to [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], cited by St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> defines a [[पुराण|Purāṇa]] as a tale which deals with the primitive condition of the universe and the creation of the world, but there is no ground for supposing that this view is correct, or for clearly distinguishing [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]] and [[पुराण|Purāṇa]]. See '''[[इतिहास|Itihāsa]].'''

पुराण
<u>'''2. Purāṇa'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā (xxxix. 7). <br>==Foot Notes==

पुरीकय
<u>'''Purīkaya'''</u> is the name of a water animal in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1866> xi. 2, 25.</ref> being clearly a variant of the name that appears as [[पुलीकय|Pulīkaya]] in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1866> iii. 14, 2. [[पुलीका|Pulīkā]], ''ibid.,'' 5, is a variant of [[कुलीका|Kulīkā]].</ref> and as Kulīpaya in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1866> xxiv. 21. 35.</ref> and as [[कुलीकय|Kulīkaya]] in the Taittirī, [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve1_1866> v. 5, 13, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 96;<br> Bloomfield, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 557;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 621.</ref> What animal is meant is quite unknown.

पुरीषिणी
<u>'''Purīṣiṇī'''</u> is found in a hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1867> v. 53, 9.</ref> apparently either as the name of a river,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1867> An alternative suggested by Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> or much more probably as an epithet of the '''[[सरयु|Sarayu]],'''<ref name=fx3_ve1_1867> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 17;<br> Geldner, ''Riveda, Glossar,'' 111.</ref> meaning, perhaps, ‘abounding in water,’ ‘swollen,’<ref name=fx4_ve1_1867> Geldner, ''loc. cit.''</ref> or ‘carrying rubble.’<ref name=fx5_ve1_1867> Roth, ''loc. cit.''</ref>

पुरु-कुत्स
<u>'''Puru-kutsa'''</u> is the name of a king who is mentioned several times in the Rigveda. In one passage<ref name=fx1_ve1_1868> i. 63, 7.</ref> he is mentioned as a contemporary of '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]],''' but whether as a foe, according to Ludwig,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1868> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 174, emending ''sudāse'' in the text to ''sudāsam,'' plausibly, but not, of course, convincingly.</ref> or merely as a contemporary, according to Hillebrandt,<ref name=fx3_ve1_1868> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 115. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 204. 205, 219.</ref> is uncertain. In two other passages<ref name=fx4_ve1_1868> i. 112, 7, 14;<br> 174, 2.</ref> he is mentioned as victorious by divine favour, and in another<ref name=fx5_ve1_1868> vi. 20, 10. ''Cf.'' i. 63, 7, where [[पूरु|Pūru]] also is mentioned. Ludwig suggests reading in vi. 20, 10, ''saudāsīḥ'' for ''dāsīḥ,'' referring to the forts of [[सुदास्|Sudās]];<br> but this must be regarded as illegitimate. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift,'' 55, 330.</ref> he appears as a king of the '''Pūrus''' and a conqueror of the '''Dāsas.''' His son was '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]],'''<ref name=fx6_ve1_1868> Rv. iv. 42, 8. 9.</ref> who is accordingly called '''Paurukutsya'''<ref name=fx7_ve1_1868> Rv. v. 33, 8;<br> viii. 19, 36.</ref> or '''Paurukutsi.'''<ref name=fx8_ve1_1868> Rv. vii. 19, 3.</ref> Different conclusions have been drawn from one hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx9_ve1_1868> Rv. iv. 42, 8. 9, with Sāyaṇa's note;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 266, 267.</ref> in which the birth of Purukutsa's son,  [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]], is mentioned. The usual interpretation is that [[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]] was killed in battle or captured, whereupon his wife secured a son to restore the fortunes of the Pūrus. But Sieg<ref name=fx10_ve1_1868> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 96-102.</ref> offers a completely different interpretation. According to him the word '''daurgahe,''' which occurs in the hymn, and which in the ordinary view is rendered ‘descendant of [[दुर्गह|Durgaha]],’ an ancestor of [[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]], is the name of a horse, the hymn recording the success of an [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) undertaken by [[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]] for his wife, as by kings in later times, to secure a son. This interpretation is supported by the version of ''daurgahe'' given in the Śatapatha,<ref name=fx11_ve1_1868> xiii. 5, 4, 5.</ref> but is by no means certain. Moreover, if [[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]] was a contemporary of [[सुदास्|Sudās]], the defeat of the Pūrus by [[सुदास्|Sudās]] in the '''[[दाशराज्ञ|Dāśarājña]]'''<ref name=fx12_ve1_1868> vii. 18. ''Cf.'' also the reference to a [[पूरु|Pūru]] defeat in vii. 8, 4.</ref> might well have been the cause of the troubles from which '''[[पुरुकुत्सानी|Purukutsānī]],''' by the birth of [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]], rescued the family. In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx13_ve1_1868> xiii. 5, 4, 5. ''Cf.'' '''[[इक्ष्वाकु|Ikṣvāku]], Tryaruṇa,''' and Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 403.</ref> [[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]] is called an [[ऐक्ष्वाक|Aikṣvāka]].

पुरुकुत्सानी
<u>'''Purukutsānī,'''</u> ‘wife of '''[[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]],'''’ is mentioned as the mother of '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]]''' in one hymn of the Rigveda (iv. 42, 9).<br>==Foot Notes==

पुरु-णीथ शात-वनेय
<u>'''Puru-ṇītha Śāta-vaneya'''</u> (‘descendant of Śatavani’) is the name of a sacrificer, or perhaps a priest, a [[भारद्वाज|Bhāradvāja]], in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve1_1870> i. 59, 7.</ref> It is doubtful whether he is also mentioned as a singer in another passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve1_1870> vii. 9. 6. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 160;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 60.</ref> In both places Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_1870> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> sees in Puru-ṇītha merely a word meaning ‘choral song.’

पुरु-दम
<u>'''Puru-dama'''</u> occurs in the plural in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve1_1871> vii. 73, 1.</ref> where, according to Ludwig,<ref name=fx2_ve1_1871> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, xxv.</ref> it is probably the proper name of the singers, but by Roth<ref name=fx3_ve1_1871> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> and Whitney<ref name=fx4_ve1_1871> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 437.</ref> is understood as merely an adjective meaning ‘possessed of many houses’ 

पुरु-पन्था
<u>'''Puru-panthā'''</u> is mentioned as a generous donor to a '''[[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]]''' in one hymn of the Rigveda (vi. 63, 10).<br>==Foot Notes==

पुरु-माय्य
<u>'''Puru-māyya'''</u> occurs in one hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1873> viii. 68, 10. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 163.</ref> as a protégé of Indra. It is quite possible that he was the father of, or at least connected with, '''[[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]], [[ऋक्ष|Ṛkṣa]],''' and '''[[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]],''' who are celebrated in the hymn.

पुरु-मित्र
<u>'''Puru-mitra'''</u> is mentioned twice in the Rigveda (i. 117, 20; x. 39, 7) as the father of a maiden who wedded '''[[विमद|Vimada]],''' apparently against her father's will.<br>==Foot Notes==

पुरु-मीळ्ह
<u>'''Puru-mīḷha'''</u> is mentioned twice in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve1_1875> i. 151, 2;<br> 183. 5.</ref> as an ancient sage, in which capacity he appears in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve1_1875> iv. 29, 4;<br> xviii. 3, 15.</ref> also. Perhaps the same<ref name=fx3_ve1_1875> See, however, Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 27, n. 3;<br> Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 62, n. 3</ref> [[पुरुमीळ्ह|Purumīḷha]] is intended in an obscure hymn in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1875> v. 61, 9.</ref> where, according to the legends reported in the Bṛhaddevatā<ref name=fx5_ve1_1875> v. 49 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes.</ref> and by Ṣaḍguruśiṣya in his commentary on the Sarvānukramaṇī,<ref name=fx6_ve1_1875> Edition Macdonell, pp. 118 ''et seq.''</ref> and by Sāyaṇa in his commentary on the Rigveda,<ref name=fx4_ve1_1875/> he as well as '''[[तरन्त|Taranta]]''' was a son of Vidadaśva, and a patron of the singer '''[[श्यावाश्व|Śyāvāśva]].''' The correctness of the legend has been shown to be most improbable by Oldenberg,<ref name=fx7_ve1_1875> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 353, 354. ''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 359.</ref> who points out<ref name=fx8_ve1_1875> ''Op. cit.,'' 354, n. 1.</ref> that the legend misinterprets the Rigveda by making [[पुरुमीळ्ह|Purumīḷha]] a [[वैदद्अश्वि|Vaidadaśvi]], for he is there only compared in generosity to one.<br><br>In another legend found in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx9_ve1_1875> xiii. 7, 12.</ref> and based on a hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx10_ve1_1875> ix. 58, 3.</ref> [[पुरुमीळ्ह|Purumīḷha]] and [[तरन्त|Taranta]] appear as persons who received gifts from '''[[ध्वस्र|Dhvasra]]''' and '''[[पुरुषन्ति|Puruṣanti]],''' and as sons of Vidadaśva. The legend, which also occurs in the Śāṭyāyanaka,<ref name=fx11_ve1_1875> Cited by Sāyaṇa on Rv., ''loc. cit.''</ref> is apparently best explained by  Sieg,<ref name=fx12_ve1_1875> ''Op, cit.,'' 63.</ref> who says that as the two were kings they could not under the rules of caste accept gifts, unless for the nonce they became singers. The legend has no claim at all, as Oldenberg<ref name=fx13_ve1_1875> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 232, n. 1. He points out, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 354, that the legend is not accepted by the Anukramaṇī (Index), since its list of authors gives [[अवत्सार|Avatsāra]] as the [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]], not the two [[तरन्त|Taranta]] and [[पुरुमीळ्ह|Purumīḷha]].</ref> shows, to validity. 

पुरुष
<u>'''Puruṣa,'''</u> or '''[[पूरुष|Pūruṣa]],''' is the generic term for ‘man’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1> vii. 104, 15;<br> x. 97. 4. 5. 8;<br> 165, 3.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1> Av. iii. 21, 1;<br> v. 21, 4;<br> viii. 2, 25;<br> 7, 2;<br> xii. 3, 51;<br> 4, 25;<br> xiii. 4, 42, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 1, 5;<br> 2, 2, 8;<br> v. 2, 5, 1, etc.</ref> Man is composed of five parts according to the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1> xii. 3, 10;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 5, 26;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 14;<br> vi. 29.</ref> or of six according to the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx4_ve2_1> ii. 39.</ref> or of sixteen,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 4, 16.</ref> or of twenty,<ref name=fx6_ve2_1> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxiii. 14, 5.</ref> or of twenty-one,<ref name=fx7_ve2_1> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 8, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 1, 6;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 18;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 2, 4, etc.</ref> or of twenty-four,<ref name=fx8_ve2_1> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 2, 1, 23.</ref> or of twenty-five,<ref name=fx9_ve2_1> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 12, 10;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, i. 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 2, 4.</ref> all more or less fanciful enumerations. Man is the first of animals,<ref name=fx10_ve2_1> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 2, 1, 18;<br> vii. 5, 2, 17. He is the master of animals, [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xx. 10.</ref> but also essentially an animal (see '''[[पशु|Paśu]]'''). The height of a man is given in the Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx11_ve2_1> xvi. 8, 21. 25.</ref> as four Aratnis (‘cubits’) , each of two Padas (‘feet’), each of twelve Aṅgulis (‘finger's breadths’); and the term [[पुरुष|Puruṣa]] itself is found earlier<ref name=fx12_ve2_1> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 5, 14;<br> xiii. 8, 1, 19;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 5, 1.</ref> as a measure of length.<br><br>[[पुरुष|Puruṣa]] is also applied to denote the length of a man's life, a ‘generation’;<ref name=fx13_ve2_1> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 5, 5;<br> v. 4, 10, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 3, 6;<br> ''dvi-[[पुरुष|puruṣa]]'' (‘two generations’), [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 7, etc.</ref> the ‘pupil’ in the eye;<ref name=fx14_ve2_1> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 5, 2. 7. 8;<br> xii. 9, 1, 12;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 3, 9.</ref> and in the grammatical literature the ‘person’ of the verb.<ref name=fx15_ve2_1> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vii. 1, 2.</ref> 

पुरुष मृग
<u>'''Puruṣa Mṛga'''</u> the ‘man wild beast,’ occurs in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_2> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 15, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 16;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 35.</ref> Zimmer's<ref name=fx2_ve2_2> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 85.</ref> view that the ape is meant seems probable. According to him also, the word [[पुरुष|Puruṣa]] alone, in two passages of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx3_ve2_2> vi. 38, 4;<br> xix. 39, 4.</ref> refers to the ape and its cry (''[[मायु|māyu]]''); but this sense is not necessary, and it is not adopted by Bloomfield,<ref name=fx4_ve2_2> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda.'' 117.</ref> though Whitney<ref name=fx5_ve2_2> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 309.</ref> does not think the rendering ‘cry of a man’ satisfactory, the term ''[[मायु|māyu]]'' not being properly applicable to the noise made by human beings.

पुरुष हस्तिन्
<u>'''Puruṣa Hastin'''</u> (‘the man with a hand’) is found in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_3> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 29;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 8.</ref> It must be the ‘ape.’

पुरुषन्ति
<u>'''Puruṣanti'''</u> is a name that occurs twice in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_4> i. 112, 23;<br> ix. 58, 3.</ref> in the first passage denoting a protégé of the Aśvins, in the second a patron who gave presents to one of the Vedic singers. In both cases the name is joined with that of '''[[ध्वसन्ति|Dhvasanti]]''' or '''[[ध्वस्र|Dhvasra]].''' The presumption from the manner in which these three names are mentioned is that they designate men, but the grammatical form of the words might equally well be feminine. Females must be meant, if the evidence of the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_4> xiii. 7, 12. Roth thinks the feminine form ''Dhvasre'' here is a corruption, based on the dual form occurring in the Rigveda, ''Dhvasrayoḥ,'' which might be feminine as well as masculine.</ref> is to be taken as decisive, for the form of the first of the two names there occurring, ''Dhvasre Puruṣantī,'' ‘Dhvasrā and [[पुरुषन्ति|Puruṣanti]],’ is exclusively feminine, though '''here''' as well as elsewhere Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx3_ve2_4> Also on the Śāṭyāyanaka, cited on Rv. ix. 58, 3, and on Rv. i. 112, 23.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 27, n. 1;<br> Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 62, 63;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 232, n. 1.</ref> interprets the names as masculines. See also '''[[तरन्त|Taranta]]''' and '''[[पुरुमीळ्ह|Purumīḷha]].''' 

पुरु-हन्मन्
<u>'''Puru-hanman'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in a hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_5> viii. 70,</ref> an '''[[आङ्गिरस|Āṅgirasa]],''' according to the Rigvedic Anukramaṇī (Index), but according to the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_5> xiv. 9, 29. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 107.</ref> a '''[[वैखानस|Vaikhānasa]].'''

पुरू-रवस्
<u>'''Purū-ravas'''</u> is the name of a hero in a hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_6> x. 95.</ref> containing a curious dialogue between him and a nymph, Urvaśī, an Apsaras. He is also mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_6> xi. 5, 1, 1. ''Cf.'' iii. 4, 1, 22;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, viii. 10;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], x. 46.</ref> where several verses of the Rigvedic dialogue find a setting in a continuous story. In the later literature he is recognized as a king.<ref name=fx3_ve2_6> See Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 283 ''et seq.''</ref> His name is perhaps intended in one other passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx4_ve2_6> i. 31, 4.</ref> It is impossible to say whether he is a mythical figure pure and simple, or really an ancient king. His epithet, Aiḷa,<ref name=fx5_ve2_6> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 1, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 196;<br> Max Müller, ''Chips,'' 42, 109 ''et seq.;<br>'' Kuhn, ''Die Herabkunft des Feuers,'' 85 ''et seq.;<br>'' Roth, ''[[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], Erläuterungen,'' 153;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' 124, 135;<br> Oldenberg, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 46, 28, 323.</ref> ‘descendant of Iḍā’ (a sacrificial goddess), is certainly in favour of the former alternative.

पुरूरु
<u>'''Purūru'''</u> is the name of a poet, an '''[[आत्रेय|Ātreya]],''' in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_7> v. 70, 1.</ref> according to Ludwig.<ref name=fx2_ve2_7> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 126. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 215, n. 1;<br> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 360.</ref> But the only form of the word found, ''purūruṇā,'' seems merely an adverb meaning ‘far and wide.’

पुरू-वसु
<u>'''Purū-vasu'''</u> (‘abounding in wealth’) is the name of a poet, an '''[[आत्रेय|Ātreya]],''' according to Ludwig,<ref name=fx1_ve2_8> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 126.</ref> in one passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_8> v. 36, 3. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 215, n. 1;<br> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 333.</ref> But this is very doubtful. 

पुरो-डाश्
<u>'''Puro-ḍāś'''</u> is the name of the sacrificial cake in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_9> iii. 28, 2;<br> 41, 3;<br> 52, 2;<br> iv. 24, 5;<br> vi. 23, 7;<br> viii. 31, 2, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_9> Av. ix. 6, 12;<br> x. 9, 25;<br> xii. 4, 35;<br> xviii. 4, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 2, 8;<br> vii. 1, 9, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 85;<br> xxviii. 23, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 270.</ref>

पुरो-धा
<u>'''Puro-dhā'''</u> denotes the office of [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], ‘domestic priest.’ Its mention as early as the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_10> v. 24, 1.</ref> and often later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_10> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 2, 9;<br> vii. 4, 1, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 1, 2;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 12;<br> 9, 27;<br> xv. 4, 7;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 31;<br> viii. 24, 27;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 4, 5.</ref> shows that the post was a fully recognized and usual one.

पुरो-'नुवाक्या
<u>'''Puro-'nuvākyā'''</u> (‘introductory verse to be recited’) is the technical term for the address to a god inviting him to partake of the offering; it was followed by the '''[[याज्या|Yājyā]],''' which accompanied the actual oblation.<ref name=fx1_ve2_11> Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 387, 388.</ref> Such addresses are not unknown, but are rare, according to Oldenberg,<ref name=fx2_ve2_11> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 243 ''et seq.,'' against Bergaigne, ''Recherches surl'llistoire de la liturgie védique,'' 13 ''et seq.''</ref> in the Rigveda; subsequently they are regular, the word itself occurring in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx3_ve2_11> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 10, 4;<br> ii. 2, 9, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xx. 12, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx4_ve2_11> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 17;<br> ii. 13, 26;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 1, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 2, 21, etc.</ref>

पुरो-रुच्
<u>'''Puro-ruc'''</u> is the technical description of certain '''[[निविद्|Nivid]]''' verses which were recited at the morning libation in the [[आज्य|Ājya]] and Praüga ceremonies before the hymn (''[[सूक्त|sūkta]]'') of the litany or its parts. It occurs in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_12> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 10, 13;<br> vii. 2, 7, 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 39;<br> iii. 9;<br> iv. 5;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1, 4, 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 3, 15;<br> 2, 1, 8;<br> v. 4, 4, 20, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Rituallitteratur,'' 102.</ref> 

पुरो-वात
<u>'''Puro-vāta,'''</u> the ‘east wind,’ is mentioned in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_13> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 11, 3;<br> ii. 4, 7, 1;<br> iv. 3, 3, 1;<br> 4, 6, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 2, 18;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 3, 1, etc.</ref> Geldner<ref name=fx2_ve2_13> ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 120, n. 2.</ref> thinks it merely means the wind preceding the rains.

पुरो-हित
<u>'''Puro-hita'''</u> (‘placed in front,’ ‘appointed’) is the name of a priest in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_14> i. 1, 1;<br> 44, 10. 12;<br> ii. 24, 9;<br> iii. 2, 8;<br> 3, 2;<br> v. 11, 2;<br> vi. 70, 4, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_14> Av. viii. 5, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ix. 23;<br> xi. 81;<br> xxxi. 20;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 24, etc.;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 12;<br> vii. 15.</ref> The office of [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] is called Purohiti<ref name=fx3_ve2_14> Rv. vii. 60, 12;<br> 83, 4.</ref> and '''[[पुरोधा|Purodhā]].''' It is clear that the primary function of the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] was that of ‘domestic priest’ of a king, or perhaps a great noble; his quite exceptional position is shown by the fact that only one [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] seems ever to be mentioned in Vedic literature.<ref name=fx4_ve2_14> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 144, thinks that several Purohitas were possible, quoting Sāyaṇa, on Rv. x. 57, 1, who gives the tale of the Gaupāyanas and King Asamāti from the Śāṭyāyanaka, and comparing the case of [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] and [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] as Purohitas, probably contemporaneously, of [[सुदास्|Sudās]]. But that the two were contemporaneous is most unlikely, especially if we adopt the very probable view of Hopkins (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 260 ''et seq.'') that [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] was with the ten kings (Rv. vii. 18) when they unsuccessfully attacked [[सुदास्|Sudās]]. The other narrative has, as Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 375, n. 3, observes, a markedly fictitious character;<br> while every other passage that mentions a [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] speaks of him in the singular, and as there was only one [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] priest at the sacrifice, so the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] acted as [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]].</ref> Examples of Purohitas in the Rigveda are '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]'''<ref name=fx5_ve2_14> iii. 33. 53. ''Cf.'' vii. 18.</ref> or '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]]'''<ref name=fx6_ve2_14> Rv. vii. 18. 83.</ref> in the service of the '''[[भरत|Bharata]]''' king; '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]],''' of the '''[[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]]''' family; the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of '''Kuruśravaṇa;'''<ref name=fx7_ve2_14> Rv. x. 33. See Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 150, 184.</ref> and '''Devāpi,''' the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of '''Śantanu.'''<ref name=fx8_ve2_14> Rv. x. 98.</ref> The [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] was in all religious matters the ''alter ego'' of the king. In the ritual<ref name=fx9_ve2_14> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 24.</ref> it is laid down that a king must have a [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], else the gods will not accept his offerings. He ensures the king's safety and victory in battle by his prayers;<ref name=fx10_ve2_14> See Av. iii. 19;<br> Rv. vii. 18, 13, from which Geldner, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 135, n. 3, concludes that the priest prayed in the '''[[सभा|Sabhā]],''' ‘house of assembly,’ while the king fought on the field of battle. See Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 12. 19. 20. ''Cf.'' '''[[पूरु|Pūru]],''' n. 2.</ref> he procures  the fall of rain for the crops;<ref name=fx11_ve2_14> Rv. x. 98.</ref> he is the flaming fire that guards the kingdom.<ref name=fx12_ve2_14> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 24. 25.</ref> Divodāsa in trouble is rescued by [[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]];<ref name=fx13_ve2_14> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xv. 3, 7.</ref> and King '''Tryaruṇa [[त्रैधात्व|Traidhātva]] [[ऐक्ष्वाक|Aikṣvāka]]''' reproaches his [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], '''[[वृश जान|Vṛśa Jāna]],''' when his car runs over a Brahmin boy and kills him.<ref name=fx14_ve2_14> ''Ibid.,'' xiii. 3, 12. See Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 64, ''et seq.''</ref> The close relation of king and [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] is illustrated by the case of '''[[कुत्स औरव|Kutsa Aurava]],''' who slew his [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], '''[[उपगु सौश्रवस|Upagu Sauśravasa]],''' for disloyalty in serving Indra, to whom [[कुत्स|Kutsa]] was hostile.<ref name=fx15_ve2_14> ''Ibid.,'' xiv. 6, 8.</ref> Other disputes between kings and priests who officiated for them are those of '''[[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]]''' and the '''Kaśyapas,''' and of '''Viśvantara''' and the '''Śyāparṇas;'''<ref name=fx16_ve2_14> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 27. 35.</ref> and between '''Asamāti''' and the '''Gaupāyanas.'''<ref name=fx17_ve2_14> See Śāṭyāyanaka, cited by Sāyaṇa, on Rv. x. 57, 1;<br> and ''cf.'' Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 167 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 41).</ref> In some cases one [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] served more than one king; for example, '''[[देवभाग श्रौतर्ष|Devabhāga Śrautarṣa]]''' was the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of the '''Kurus''' and the '''Sṛṅjayas''' at the same time,<ref name=fx18_ve2_14> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 4, 5. According to Sāyaṇa, on Rv. i. 81, 3. is was '''[[राहूगण|Rāhūgaṇa]] [[गोतम|Gotama]]''' who was [[पुरोहित|Purohita]];<br> but this is hardly more than a mere blunder. See Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 152;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 2, 9, n.</ref> and '''[[जल जातूकर्ण्य|Jala Jātūkarṇya]]''' was the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of the kings of '''[[काशि|Kāśi]], [[विदेह|Videha]],''' and '''[[कोसल|Kosala]].'''<ref name=fx19_ve2_14> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 29, 5.</ref><br><br>There is no certain proof that the office of [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] was hereditary in a family, though it probably was so.<ref name=fx20_ve2_14> See Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 375, who compares the permanent character of the relation of the king and the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] with that of husband and wife, as shown in the ritual laid down in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 27.</ref> At any rate, it seems clear from the relations of the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] with King '''Kuruśravaṇa,''' and with his son '''[[उपमश्रवस्|Upamaśravas]],'''<ref name=fx21_ve2_14> See Rv. x. 33, and n. 7.</ref> that a king would keep on the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of his father.<br><br>Zimmer<ref name=fx22_ve2_14> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 195, 196.</ref> thinks that the king might act as his own [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], as shown by the case of King Viśvantara, who sacrificed without the help of the Śyāparṇas,<ref name=fx23_ve2_14> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 27;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 436-440.</ref> and that a [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] need not be a priest, as shown by the case of Devāpi and Śantanu.<ref name=fx24_ve2_14> Rv. x. 98.</ref> But neither opinion seems to be justified. It is not said that  Viśvantara sacrificed without priests, while Devāpi is not regarded as a king until the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx25_ve2_14> ii. 10.</ref> and there is no reason to suppose that Yāska's view expressed in that work is correct.<br><br>According to Geldner,<ref name=fx26_ve2_14> ''Op. cit.,'' 2, 144;<br> 3, 155. ''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Go7ttingisehe Gelehrte Anzeigen,'' 1894, 420;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Rituallitteratur,'' 13. Rv. i. 94, 6, does not prove that the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] was a [[ऋत्व्इज्|Ṛtvij]]: it merely shows that he could be one when he wished.</ref> the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] from the beginning acted as the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] priest in the sacrificial ritual, being there the general superintendent of the sacrifice. In favour of this view, he cites the fact that [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] is mentioned both as [[पुरोहित|Purohita]]<ref name=fx27_ve2_14> Rv. x. 150, 5.</ref> and as [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]]:<ref name=fx28_ve2_14> Rv. vii. 33, 11. But this need mean no more than Brahmin.</ref> at the sacrifice of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]]''' he served as [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]],<ref name=fx29_ve2_14> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 16, 1;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 21, 4.</ref> but he was the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of [[सुदास्|Sudās]];<ref name=fx30_ve2_14> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 11 14.</ref> [[बृहस्पति|Bṛhaspati]] is called the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]]<ref name=fx31_ve2_14> Rv. ii. 24, 9;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 17, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 1, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 1, 2;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiv. 23, 1</ref> and the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]]<ref name=fx32_ve2_14> Rv. x. 141, 3;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 13;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 4, 21;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 6, 9.</ref> of the gods; and the Vasiṣṭhas who are Purohitas are also the Brahmans at the sacrifice.<ref name=fx33_ve2_14> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 5, 2, 1. This point is not in the parallel versions, [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 17 (but ''cf.'' xxvii. 4: ''brahma-purohitaṃ kṣatram,'' unless this means ‘the [[क्षत्र|Kṣatra]] is inferior to the Brahma’);<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xv. 5, 24, and ''cf.'' Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 13. The [[अथर्वन्|Atharvan]] literature (Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' lx, lxi) requires a follower of that Veda to act as [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], and the spells of the [[अथर्वन्|Atharvan]] are, in fact, closely allied to the spells of the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] as represented in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 24-28. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 193, 195.</ref> It is thus clear that the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] was often the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]]; and it was natural that this should be the case when once the Brahman's place became, as it did in the later ritual, the most important position at the sacrifice.<ref name=fx34_ve2_14> See Bloomfield, ''op. cit.,'' lviii, lxii, lxv, lxviii ''et seq.''</ref> But the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] can hardly be said to have held this place in the earlier ritual; Oldenberg<ref name=fx35_ve2_14> ''Religion des Veda,'' 380, 381.</ref> seems to be right in holding that the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] was originally the [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] priest, the singer ''par excellence,'' when he took any part at all in the ritual of the great sacrifices with the '''Ṛtvijs.''' So Devāpi seems clearly to have  been a [[होतृ|Hotṛ]];<ref name=fx36_ve2_14> Rv. x. 98;<br> and ''cf.'' [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 6, 8;<br> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 12, 7.</ref> Agni is at once [[पुरोहित|Purohita]]<ref name=fx37_ve2_14> Rv. i. 1, 1;<br> iii. 3, 2;<br> 11, 1;<br> v. 11, 2. In viii. 27, 1;<br> x. 1, 6, he is called [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], and credited with the characteristic activities of the [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] priest.</ref> and [[होतृ|Hotṛ]];<ref name=fx38_ve2_14> Rv. i. 1, 1;<br> iii. 3, 2;<br> 11, 1;<br> v. 11, 2. etc.</ref> and the ‘two divine Hotṛs’ referred to in the Āprī litanies are also called the ‘two Purohitas.’<ref name=fx39_ve2_14> Rv. x. 66, 13;<br> 70, 7.</ref> Later, no doubt, when the priestly activity ceased to centre in the song, the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], with his skill in magic, became the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], who also required magic to undo the errors of the sacrifice.<ref name=fx40_ve2_14> ''Cf.'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 26.</ref><br><br>There is little doubt that in the original growth of the priesthood the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] played a considerable part. In historical times he represented the real power of the kingship, and may safely be deemed to have exercised great influence in all public affairs, such as the administration of justice and the king's conduct of business. But it is not at all probable that the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] represents, as Roth<ref name=fx41_ve2_14> ''Zur Litteratur und Geschichte des Weda,'' 117 ''et seq.''</ref> and Zimmer<ref name=fx42_ve2_14> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 195.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 168, 169;<br> 195 ''et seq.;<br>'' Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 485;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 31-35;<br> 138;<br> Haug, ''Brahma und die Brahmanen,'' 9 ''et seq.;<br>'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 144;<br> Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 374-383;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' lxx ''et seq.''</ref> thought, the source which gave rise to caste. The priestly class is already in existence in the Rigveda (see '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]]''').

पुलस्ति
<u>'''Pulasti'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_15> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 9, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 43.</ref> or '''Pulastin'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_15> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhītā, xvii. 15. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 265.</ref> in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās denotes ‘wearing the hair plain,’ as opposed to ''kapardin,'' ‘wearing the hair in braids.’

पुलिन्द
<u>'''Pulinda'''</u> is the name of an outcast tribe mentioned with the '''Andhras''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_16> vii. 18.</ref> but not in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_16> xv. 26.</ref> in connexion with the story of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]].''' The Pulindas again appear associated with the Andhras in the time of Aśoka.<ref name=fx3_ve2_16> Vincent Smith, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 56, 652.</ref> 

पुलीकय
<u>'''Pulīkaya.'''</u> See '''[[पुरीकय|Purīkaya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

पुलीका
<u>'''Pulīkā'''</u> seems to designate some kind of bird in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (iii. 14, 5). The name appears in the form of [[कुलीका|Kulīkā]] in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā (xxiv. 24).<br>==Foot Notes==

पुलुष प्राचीन-योग्य
<u>'''Puluṣa Prācīna-yogya'''</u> (‘descendant of Prācīnayoga’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[दृति|Dṛti]] Aindroti [[शौनक|Śaunaka]],''' in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 40, 2). He taught '''[[पौलुषि|Pauluṣi]] [[सत्ययज्ञ|Satyayajña]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

पुष्कर
<u>'''Puṣkara'''</u> is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_20> vi. 16, 13;<br> vii. 33, 11, may be so taken, though Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 3, and Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 112, prefer to see in these passages a reference to the bowl of the sacrificial ladle.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_20> Av. xi. 3, 8;<br> xii. 1, 24;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 4, 1;<br> 2, 6, 5;<br> 6, 4, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xi. 29;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 1, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 5, 1, 16;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 5.</ref> of the blue lotus flower. The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_20> Av. xii. 1, 24.</ref> mentions its sweet perfume. The lotus grew in lakes, which were thence called ''puṣkariṇī,'' ‘lotus-bearing.’<ref name=fx4_ve2_20> Rv. v. 78, 7;<br> x. 107, 10;<br> Av. iv. 34, 5;<br> v. 16, 17;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 3, 11, etc.</ref> That the flower was early used for personal adornment is shown by an epithet of the Aśvins, ‘lotuscrowned’ (''[[पुष्कर|puṣkara]]-sraj'').<ref name=fx5_ve2_20> Rv. x. 184, 2;<br> Av. iii. 22, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 5, 16, etc.</ref><br><br>Presumably because of its likeness in shape to the flower of the lotus, the bowl of the ladle is called [[पुष्कर|Puṣkara]], perhaps already in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx6_ve2_20> Rv. viii 72, 11, where the sense is doubtful, and the bowl of the ladle is not particularly appropriate. See also note 1.</ref> and certainly in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx7_ve2_20> vii. 5.</ref> Moreover, according to the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx8_ve2_20> v. 14.</ref> [[पुष्कर|Puṣkara]] means ‘water,’ a sense actually found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx9_ve2_20> vi. 4, 2, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 71.</ref>

पुष्कर-साद
<u>'''Puṣkara-sāda,'''</u> ‘sitting on the lotus,’ is the name of an animal in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’)  in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_21> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 14, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 12;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 5.</ref> It can hardly be a ‘snake,’<ref name=fx2_ve2_21> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 95, so takes it.</ref> but rather either, as Roth<ref name=fx3_ve2_21> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> thinks, a ‘bird,’ or perhaps, according to the commentator on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve2_21/> a ‘bee.’

पुष्टि-गु
<u>'''Puṣṭi-gu'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] mentioned in a [[वालखिल्य|Vālakhilya]] hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_22> viii. 51, 1. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 140, 141.</ref>

पुष्प
<u>'''Puṣpa'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_23> viii. 7, 12. ''Cf.'' x. 8, 34.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_23> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 28;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 4, 1;<br> xv. 3, 23;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 4, 4, 2;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 1, 2;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 1, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘flower’ generally.

पुष्य
<u>'''Puṣya'''</u> is the name in the Atharvaveda (xix. 7, 2 for the '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]]''' called '''[[तिष्य|Tiṣya]]''' elsewhere.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 371. On [[तिष्य|Tiṣya]], see also ''Journal of the Royal Asatic Society,'' 1911, 514-518; 794-800.<br>==Foot Notes==

पूत-क्रता
<u>'''Pūta-kratā'''</u> is the name of a woman in a [[वालखिल्य|Vālakhilya]] hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_25> viii. 64, 4.</ref> perhaps the wife of '''[[पूतक्रतु|Pūtakratu]],''' but this is doubtful, since the more regular form would be Pūtakratāyī,<ref name=fx2_ve2_25> Pāṇini, iv. 1, 36.</ref> which Scheftelowitz<ref name=fx3_ve2_25> ''Die Apokryphen des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 41, 42.</ref> reads in the hymn.

पूत-क्रतु
<u>'''Pūta-kratu'''</u> (‘of clear insight’) is the name of a patron in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_26> viii. 68, 17. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 163. Scheftelowitz, ''Die Apokryphen des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 41, reads [[पूतक्रतु|Pūtakratu]] for [[पौतक्रत|Pautakrata]] in Rv. viii. 56, 2, but this is improbable. See Oldenberg, ''Go7ttingische Gelekrte Anzeigen,'' 1907, 237, 238;<br> Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 39, n. 4.</ref> apparently the son of '''[[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]].''' 

पूति-रज्जु
<u>'''Pūti-rajju'''</u> is the name of a certain plant of unknown kind in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_27> viii. 8, 2.</ref> according to Roth.<ref name=fx2_ve2_27> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> The [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_27> xvi. 10.</ref> treats it as a ‘putrid rope,’ but Ludwig<ref name=fx4_ve2_27> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 527. ''Cf.'' Whitney's Translation of the Rigveda, 503;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 583.</ref> suggests that a snake is meant.

पूतीक
<u>'''Pūtīka'''</u> is the name of a plant often mentioned<ref name=fx1_ve2_28> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 3 (''pūtika,''  as quoted in the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'');<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1, 2, 12. ''Cf.'' iv. 5, 10, 4;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 4, 1;<br> ix. 5, 3, etc.</ref> as a substitute for the Soma plant. It is also given in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve2_28> ii. 5, 3, 5.</ref> as a means of making milk curdle, being an alternative to the bark of the ''Butea frondosa ([[पर्ण|parṇa]]-[[वल्क|valka]]).'' It is usually identified with the ''Guilandina Bonduc,'' but Hillebrandt<ref name=fx3_ve2_28> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 24, n. 3. ''Cf.'' Roth, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 35, 689;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 63, 276.</ref> makes it out to be the ''Basella Cordifolia.''

पूतु-द्रु
<u>'''Pūtu-dru'''</u> is another name for the Deodar (''deva-[[दारु|dāru]]'') in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_29> viii. 2, 28.</ref> and the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx2_ve2_29> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 8, 4 (in 6 the fruit is meant);<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 8, 5.</ref> The longer form, Pūtu-[[दारु|dāru]], is found in the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_29> viii. 15;<br> lviii. 15. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 59.</ref>

पूरु
<u>'''Pūru'''</u> is the name of a people and their king in the Rigveda. They are mentioned with the '''Anus, Druhyus, Turvaśas,''' and '''Yadus''' in one passage.<ref name=fx1_ve2_30> i. 108. 8.</ref> They also occur as enemies of the '''Tṛtsus''' in the hymn of '''Sudās’''' victory.<ref name=fx2_ve2_30> vii. 18, 13. ''Cf.'' '''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]].''' Apparently, as Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 263, n., and Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 135, think, in this verse the words ''jeṣma Pūruṃ vidathe mṛdhravācam'' refer to the [[पूरु|Pūru]] king and to the priest '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]],''' who prayed for the defeat of [[सुदास्|Sudās]], though in vain. Hopkins seems to take the words ''vidathe mṛdhravācam'' generally as ‘the false speaker in the assembly’;<br> but, according to Geldner, the meaning intended is that, while the king fought, the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] prayed in the [[सभा|Sabhā]], or meeting house of the people.</ref> In another  hymn<ref name=fx3_ve2_30> Rv. vii. 8, 4.</ref> Agni of the '''Bharatas''' is celebrated as victorious over the Pūrus, probably a reference to the same decisive overthrow. On the other hand, victories of the Pūrus over the aborigines seem to be referred to in several passages.<ref name=fx4_ve2_30> i. 59, 6;<br> 131, 4;<br> 174, 2;<br> iv. 21, 10;<br> 38, 1;<br> vi. 20, 10;<br> vii. 5, 3;<br> 19, 3. ''Cf.'' note 13.</ref><br><br>The great kings of the Pūrus were '''[[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]]''' and his son '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]],''' whose name bears testimony to his prowess against aboriginal foes, while a later prince was '''[[तृक्षि|Tṛkṣi]] [[त्रासदस्यव|Trāsadasyava]].'''<br><br>In the Rigveda the Pūrus are expressly<ref name=fx5_ve2_30> vii. 96, 2. Perhaps they are also meant as living on the [[शर्यणावन्त्|Śaryaṇāvant]] in Rv. viii. 64, 10. 11.</ref> mentioned as on the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]].''' Zimmer<ref name=fx6_ve2_30> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 124.</ref> thinks that the '''[[सिन्धु|Sindhu]]''' (Indus) is meant in this passage. But Ludwig<ref name=fx7_ve2_30> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 175.</ref> and Hillebrandt<ref name=fx8_ve2_30> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 50, 115;<br> 3, 374.</ref> with much greater probability think that the eastern [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] in [[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]] is meant. This view accords well with the sudden disappearance of the name of the Pūrus from Vedic tradition, a disappearance accounted for by Oldenberg's<ref name=fx9_ve2_30> ''Buddha,'' 404. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, 3, 205.</ref> conjecture that the Pūrus became part of the great Kuru people, just as '''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]]''' and '''[[क्रिवि|Krivi]]''' disappear from the tradition on their being merged in the '''[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]]''' nation. [[त्रासदस्यव|Trāsadasyava]], the patronymic of '''Kuruśravaṇa''' in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx10_ve2_30> x. 33, 4.</ref> shows that the royal families of the Kurus and the Pūrus were allied by intermarriage.<br><br>Hillebrandt,<ref name=fx11_ve2_30> ''Op. cit.,'' 1, 114 ''et seq.''</ref> admitting that the Pūrus in later times lived in the eastern country round the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]], thinks that in earlier days they were to be found to the west of the Indus with '''Divodāsa.''' This theory must fall with the theory that Divodāsa was in the far west. It might, however, be held to be supported by the fact that Alexander found a --that is, a Paurava prince on the Hydaspes,<ref name=fx12_ve2_30> Arrian, ''Indica,'' viii. 4;<br> ix. 1;<br> xix. 3, etc. See Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 132, 133.</ref> a sort of half-way locality between the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] and the West. But it is quite simple to suppose either that the Hydaspes was the earlier home of the Pūrus, where some remained after the others had  wandered east, or that the later Paurava represents a successful onslaught upon the west from the east.<br><br>In several other passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx13_ve2_30> In Rv. i. 36, 1, ''Pūrūṇām'' might be read for ''purūṇām,'' with improvement in the sense. In i. 63, 7, there is a reference to the [[पूरु|Pūru]] king, [[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]], and [[सुदास्|Sudās]], but in what relation is uncertain (see '''[[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]]'''). In i. 130, 7. the [[पूरु|Pūru]] king and [[दिवोदास अतिथिग्व|Divodāsa Atithigva]] are both mentioned, apparently as victorious over aboriginal foes. See also i. 129, 5;<br> iv. 39, 2;<br> v. 17, 1;<br> vi. 46, 8;<br> x. 4, 1;<br> 48, 5.</ref> the Pūrus as a people seem to be meant. The [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx14_ve2_30> vii. 23;<br> Naighaṇṭuka, ii. 3.</ref> recognizes the general sense of ‘man,’ but in no passage is this really necessary or even probable. So utterly, however, is the tradition lost that the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx15_ve2_30> vi. 8, 1, 14.</ref> explains [[पूरु|Pūru]] in the Rigveda<ref name=fx16_ve2_30> vii. 8, 4.</ref> as an Asura [[रक्षस्|Rakṣas]]; it is only in the Epic that [[पूरु|Pūru]] revives as the name of a son of [[ययाति|Yayāti]] and Śarmiṣṭhā.<ref name=fx17_ve2_30> Pargiter, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1910, 26, etc. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''op. cit.,'' 1, 110 ''et seq.;<br>'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 398.</ref>

पूरुष
<u>'''Pūruṣa'''</u> has in several passages<ref name=fx1_ve2_31> Rv. vi. 39, 5 (''cf.,'' however, Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 43);<br> x. 97, 4;<br> Av. iv. 9, 7;<br> x. 1, 17;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 3, 1, 22, etc. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 383.</ref> the sense of ‘menial’ or ‘dependent,’ like the English ‘man.’

पूर्ण-मास
<u>'''Pūrṇa-māsa'''</u> denotes the full moon and the festival of that day, occurring frequently in the later Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_32> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 7, 2;<br> ii. 2, 10, 2;<br> 5, 4, 1;<br> iii. 4, 4, 1;<br> vii. 4, 8, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 1, 14;<br> iii. 5, 7, 13;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 2, 4, 8, etc.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''

पूर्त
<u>'''Pūrta,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_33> Rv. vi. 16, 18;<br> viii. 46, 21;<br> Av. vi. 123, 5;<br> ix. 5, 13;<br> 6, 31;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 64;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 21, 24, etc.</ref> or '''Pūrti,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_33> Rv. vi. 13, 6;<br> x. 107, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 2, 3, 2;<br> ii. 4, 7, 1, etc.</ref> occurs in the Rigveda and later denoting the reward to the priest for his services. ''Cf.'' '''[[दक्षिणा|Dakṣiṇā]].'''

पूर्-पति
<u>'''Pūr-pati,'''</u> ‘lord of the fort,’ occurring only once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_34> i. 173. 10.</ref> is of somewhat doubtful interpretation. The term-  may denote a regular office,<ref name=fx2_ve2_34> ''Cf.'' Sāyaṇa's note, on Rv. i. 173, 10;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 456. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 204.</ref> similar to that of the '''Grāmaṇī:''' the '''Pur''' would then be a permanently occupied settlement. The expression may, however, merely mean the chief over a fort when it was actually occupied against hostile attack. The rarity of the word seems to favour the latter sense.

पूर्व-पक्ष
<u>'''Pūrva-pakṣa'''</u> denotes the first half of the month. See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

पूर्व-वयस
<u>'''Pūrva-vayasa,'''</u> the ‘first period of life,’ is a term used in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_36> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xix. 4, 3;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 2, 3, 4;<br> 9, 1, 8;<br> ''pūrva-vayasin,'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 13, 3. ''Cf.'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 3, 3, where ''[[वत्स|vatsa]]'' and ''tṛtīya,'' ‘the third (stage),’ are used to cover ‘youth’ and ‘old age,’ as opposed to manhood, when the knowledge of the doctrines of the Āraṇyaka is to be imparted.</ref> to denote ‘youth.’

पूर्व-वह्
<u>'''Pūrva-vah'''</u> is a term applied to the horse ('''[[अश्व|Aśva]]''') in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_37> i. 1, 5, 6</ref> and elsewhere.<ref name=fx2_ve2_37> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 4, 17;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiii. 3. ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> It may either refer to a horse fastened in front as a ‘leader,’ or merely mean ‘drawing (a chariot) for the first time,’ as understood by the commentator on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].

पूर्वाह्ण
<u>'''Pūrvāhṇa,'''</u> ‘the earlier (part of the) day,’ ‘forenoon,’ is a common designation of time from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_38> x. 34, 11.</ref> onwards.<ref name=fx2_ve2_38> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 20;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 12;<br> iii. 4. 4, 2;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 11, 7;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], viii. 9, etc.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Ahan.'''

पूल्य
<u>'''Pūlya,'''</u> or '''Pūlpa,''' in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_39> xiv. 2, 63. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 765.</ref> seems to mean ‘shrivelled grain’ (''cf.'' '''Lājā'''). 

पृक्ष
<u>'''Pṛkṣa'''</u> (literally, perhaps ‘swift’) is the proper name of a man in an obscure verse of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_40> ii. 13, 8. ''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 97.</ref>

पृक्ष-याम
<u>'''Pṛkṣa-yāma'''</u> occurs once in the plural in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_41> i. 122, 7.</ref> Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_41> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> suggests the sense of ‘faring with swift steeds,’ and thinks a proper name is meant. Pischel<ref name=fx3_ve2_41> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 97, 98.</ref> holds that the word is an epithet of the '''Pajras,''' and that it means ‘performing splendid sacrifices.’

पृड
<u>'''Pṛḍa.'''</u> See '''[[मृड|Mṛḍa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

पृत्
<u>'''Pṛt'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_43> Only in the locative, Rv. ii. 27, 15;<br> 26, 1;<br> iii. 49, 3;<br> vi. 20, 1, etc.;<br> ''pṛtsuṣn,'' i. 129, 4 (with double case-ending).</ref> and Pṛtanā<ref name=fx2_ve2_43> Rv. i. 85, 8;<br> 91, 21;<br> 119, 10;<br> 152. 7;<br> ii. 40, 5;<br> iii. 24, 1;<br> vi. 41, 5;<br> x. 29, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xi. 76;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xv. 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 1, 6;<br> 2, 6, etc.</ref> denote, in the Rigveda and later, ‘contest,’ whether in arms or in the chariot race. Pṛtanā has also the concrete sense of ‘army’ in some passages;<ref name=fx3_ve2_43> Rv. vii. 20, 3;<br> viii. 36, 1;<br> 37, 2;<br> Av. vi. 97, 1;<br> viii. 5, 8;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 24;<br> perhaps also as neuter in [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 7, 5.</ref> in the Epic system<ref name=fx4_ve2_43> Mahābhārata, i. 291.</ref> it denotes a definite body of men, elephants, chariots, and horses. Pṛtanājya<ref name=fx5_ve2_43> Rv. iii. 8, 10;<br> 37, 7;<br> vii. 99, 4;<br> viii. 12, 25;<br> ix. 102, 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 4, 1.</ref> has only the sense of ‘combat.’

पृथ
<u>'''Pṛtha,'''</u> the ‘palm’ of the hand in the sense of its breath, is used as a measure of length in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Brāhmaṇā.<ref name=fx1_ve2_44> i. 6, 4, 2, 3;<br> ''cf.'' Kātyāyana Śrauṭa [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vi. 1, 28;<br> Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 2, 7;<br> viii. 5, 10.</ref>

पृथवान
<u>'''Pṛthavāna'''</u> is in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_45> x. 93, 14. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 433.</ref> the name of a man, perhaps also called '''[[दुःशीम|Duḥśīma]],''' but this is uncertain. ''Cf.'' '''[[पृथि|Pṛthi]].''' 

पृथि
<u>'''Pṛthi,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_46> Rv. i. 112, 15, as a seer;<br> as [[वैन्य|Vainya]], [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 7, 4, and perhaps ii. 7, 5, 1 (''Pṛthaye'').</ref> '''Pṛthī,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_46> As [[वैन्य|Vainya]], Rv. viii. 9, 10;<br> Av. viii. 10, 24;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 19;<br> as [[पृथि|Pṛthi]] or Pṛthī, [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 5, 1;<br> as [[वैन्य|Vainya]], Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 5, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 4 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 463). Venya mentioned with Pṛthī in Rv. x. 148, 5, may be meant for his patronymic (= [[वैन्य|Vainya]]): ''cf.'' '''[[तुग्र्य|Tugrya]],''' n. 1.</ref> or '''[[पृथु|Pṛthu]]'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_46> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 186 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 125);<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 10, 9;<br> 34, 6;<br> 45, 1.</ref> is the name of a semi-mythical personage who is mentioned in the Rigveda and later as a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]], and more specially as the inventor of agriculture<ref name=fx4_ve2_46> Av., ''loc. cit.''</ref> and the lord of both worlds, of men and of animals.<ref name=fx5_ve2_46> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit. Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 5, 1.</ref> He bears in several passages<ref name=fx6_ve2_46> See notes 1-3.</ref> the epithet [[वैन्य|Vainya]], ‘descendant of Vena,’ and must probably be regarded as a culture hero rather than as a real man. According to other accounts,<ref name=fx7_ve2_46> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.;<br>'' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.;<br>'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 7, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 166;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 221, 222;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 50, n. 2;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 134. Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 81, gives the name as Pṛthin [[वैन्य|Vainya]];<br> but the oblique cases, when found, are all in favour of [[पृथि|Pṛthi]] or Pṛthī as the stem.</ref> he was the first of consecrated kings. ''Cf.'' '''Pārthiva.'''

पृथिवी
<u>'''Pṛthivī'''</u> denotes the ‘earth’ as the ‘broad’ one in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_47> Rv. vii. 7, 2, 5;<br> 99, 3;<br> v. 85, 1, 5;<br> viii. 89, 5, etc.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_47> Av. xii. 1, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xi. 53, etc.</ref> being often personified as a deity<ref name=fx3_ve2_47> Rv. iv. 3, 5;<br> 51, 11;<br> v. 49, 5;<br> 84, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' vi. 50, 13, 14;<br> vii. 34, 23, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xii. 103, etc.</ref> both alone and with '''Div,''' ‘heaven,’ as Dyāvā-[[पृथिवी|Pṛthivī]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_47> Rv. iv. 56, 1;<br> vii. 53, 1, etc. See Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 20, 21, 123, 126.</ref> Mention is often made of three earths,<ref name=fx5_ve2_47> Rv. i. 34, 8;<br> iv. 53, 5;<br> vii. 104, 11;<br> Av. iv. 20, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, v. 9, etc.</ref> of which the world on which we live is the highest.<ref name=fx6_ve2_47> Av. vi. 21, 1;<br> xix. 27, 3;<br> 32, 4;<br> 53, 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 1, 31;<br> v. 1, 5, 21.</ref> The earth is girdled by the ocean, according to the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx7_ve2_47> viii. 20. This idea is not found in the Saṃhitās, Macdonell, ''op. cit.,'' p. 9.</ref> The [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx8_ve2_47> ix. 31;<br> xi. 36;<br> xii. 30;<br> Naighaṇṭuka, v. 3, 5, 6. ''Cf.'' Bruce, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 19, 321 ''et seq.''</ref> places one of the three earths in each of the worlds into which the universe is divided  (see '''Div'''). In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx9_ve2_47> xiv. 1, 2, 10.</ref> the earth is called the ‘firstborn of being,’ and its riches (''[[वित्त|vitta]]'') are referred to;<ref name=fx10_ve2_47> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 6, 3.</ref> hence in a late passage of the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx11_ve2_47> xiii. 1.</ref> the earth is styled ''vasu-matī,'' ‘full of wealth.’ The word also occurs in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx12_ve2_47> vi. 12, 5;<br> x. 187, 2. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''op. cit.,'' 34.</ref> though rarely, in the form of Pṛthvī.<ref name=fx13_ve2_47> The regular adjectival feminine form of ''[[पृथु|pṛthu]],'' ‘broad.’</ref>

पृथु
<u>'''Pṛthu.'''</u> See '''[[पृथि|Pṛthi]].''' Ludwig<ref name=fx1_ve2_48> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 196 ''et seq.''</ref> also finds a mention of the Pṛthus as a tribe, allied with the '''Parśus,''' in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_48> vii. 83, 1.</ref> as opponents of the '''[[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]] Bharatas.''' But this interpretation is certainly incorrect.<ref name=fx3_ve2_48> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 134 ''et seq.;<br>'' 433, 434;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 184, n. 3;<br> Bergaigne, ''Religion Védique,'' 2, 362, n.</ref> See '''[[पर्शु|Parśu]].'''

पृथु-श्रवस्
<u>'''1. Pṛthu-śravas'''</u> (‘far-famed’) is mentioned in connexion with '''[[वश|Vaśa]]''' in two hymns<ref name=fx1_ve2_49> i. 116, 21;<br> viii. 46, 21. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 162.</ref> of the Rigveda. In the second passage the generosity of [[पृथुश्रवस्|Pṛthuśravas]] [[कानीत|Kānīta]] to [[वश अश्व्य|Vaśa Aśvya]] is celebrated, and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_49> xvi. 11, 13.</ref> refers to the episode.

पृथु-श्रवस् दौरे-श्रवस
<u>'''2. Pṛthu-śravas Daure-śravasa'''</u> (‘descendant of Dūreśravas’) is the name of the Udgātṛ priest at the snake festival mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_50> xxv. 15, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 35.</ref>

पृदाकु
<u>'''Pṛdāku,'''</u> the name of a ‘snake’ in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_51> i. 27, 1;<br> iii. 27, 3;<br> vi. 38, 1;<br> vii. 56, 1;<br> x. 4, 11 ''et seq.;<br>'' xii. 3, 57.</ref> is mentioned in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’), in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx2_ve2_51> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 10, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 14;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 33.</ref> and occasionally else-  where.<ref name=fx3_ve2_51> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vi. 12;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, xii. 27.</ref> Its skin was specially valuable, according to the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx4_ve2_51> i. 27. 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 94.</ref>

पृदाकु-सानु
<u>'''Pṛdāku-sānu,'''</u> ‘having the surface of a snake,’ is taken by Ludwig<ref name=fx1_ve2_52> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 161.</ref> and Griffith<ref name=fx2_ve2_52> ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 141.</ref> as the name of the institutor of a sacrifice in one hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx3_ve2_52> viii. 17, 15.</ref>

पृशन
<u>'''Pṛśana'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_53> ix. 97, 54.</ref> is considered by Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve2_53> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 16.</ref> to denote a place where a battle was fought.

पृश्नि-गु
<u>'''1. Pṛśni-gu'''</u> is the name of a man who is mentioned with '''[[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]]''' and '''[[शुचन्ति|Śucanti]]''' as a protégé of the Aśvins in one hymn of the Rigveda (i. 112, 7). Possibly the word is only an epithet of [[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]].<br><br>''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 114.<br>==Foot Notes==

पृश्नि-गु
<u>'''2. Pṛśni-gu,'''</u> pl., is taken in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_55> vii. 18, 10.</ref> by Geldner<ref name=fx2_ve2_55> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 114.</ref> as denoting the name of a people. But this is not probable.

पृश्नि-पर्णी
<u>'''Pṛśni-parṇī'''</u> (‘having a speckled leaf’) is the name of a plant mentioned in a hymn of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_56> ii. 25, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> as a protection against evil beings procuring abortion, called Kaṇvas (presumably a sign of hostility to the '''[[कण्व|Kaṇva]]''' family).<ref name=fx2_ve2_56> ''Cf.'' Lanman in Whitney's Translation of the Atharvaveda, 65;<br> Bergaigne, ''Religion Védique,'' 2, 465;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 207.</ref> It also appears in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_56> xiii. 8, 1, 10.</ref> being identified with ''Hermionitis cordifolia'' by the St. Petersburg Dictionary, but  Roth<ref name=fx4_ve2_56> Cited by Whitney, ''loc. cit.''</ref> in a subsequent contribution suggests that it is the same as a plant later called ''lakṣmaṇā,'' and regarded as curing barrenness. The scholiast on the Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_56> xxv. 7, 17.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 187;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 69;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 302.</ref> thinks that the ''Glycine debilis'' is meant.

पृषत
<u>'''Pṛṣata'''</u> is the name of an animal mentioned in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_57> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 17, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 9. 21;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 27. 40.</ref> The dappled antelope or gazelle seems to be meant.<ref name=fx2_ve2_57> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 83.</ref>

पृषती
<u>'''Pṛṣatī'''</u> in some passages<ref name=fx1_ve2_58> Rv. viii. 64, 10. 11, where ‘deer’ is nonsense, and ‘mares’ is improbable. The regular donation is ‘cows’;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 2, 9 (see Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 125);<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 2 (though this is not certain);<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 14, 23, etc.</ref> clearly means a ‘speckled’ cow. The term is, however, generally<ref name=fx2_ve2_58> Rv. i. 37, 2;<br> 39, 6;<br> 64, 8;<br> 85, 4, 5;<br> ii. 34, 3;<br> 36, 2;<br> iii. 26, 4;<br> v. 55, 6;<br> 58, 6;<br> 60, 2;<br> i. 162, 21.</ref> applied to the team of the Maruts, when its sense is doubtful. The commentators usually explain it as ‘speckled antelope.’ But Mahīdhara,<ref name=fx3_ve2_58> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ii. 16.</ref> followed by Roth,<ref name=fx4_ve2_58> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' He had earlier (''ibid.,'' 1, 1091) been inclined to follow the usual interpretation given by Sāyaṇa on Rv. i. 37, 2, etc., which Benfey, ''Orient und Occident,'' 2, 250, accepted.</ref> prefers to see in it a ‘dappled mare’: it is true that the Maruts are often called<ref name=fx5_ve2_58> Rv. i. 87, 4;<br> 89, 7;<br> 186, 8;<br> ii. 34, 4;<br> iii. 26, 6;<br> v. 42, 15;<br> vii. 40, 3</ref> ''pṛṣad-[[अश्व|aśva]],'' which is more naturally interpreted as ‘having dappled steeds,’ than as ‘having Pṛṣatīs as steeds.’<ref name=fx6_ve2_58> So Sāyaṇa on Rv. i. 87, 4. This view is far-fetched, but is supported, in so far as the interpretation of [[पृषती|Pṛṣatī]] and [[अश्व|Aśva]] is concerned, by such passages as v. 55, 6, where the Maruts are said to yoke the Pṛṣatīs as ''aśvān'' to their chariots;<br> but the sense may be ‘horses (and) dappled (mares).’ See, however, Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 226.</ref> In the later literature, which Grassmann<ref name=fx7_ve2_58> ''Wo7rterbuch, s.v.''</ref> prefers to follow, the word means the female of the dappled gazelle.  Aufrecht<ref name=fx8_ve2_58> See Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 152.</ref> concurs in the view of Roth, but Max Müller<ref name=fx9_ve2_58> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 70;<br> 184.</ref> is inclined to accept the traditional interpretation, while Muir<ref name=fx10_ve2_58> ''Op. cit.,'' 5, 151, 152.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 83.</ref> leaves the matter open.

पृषद्-आज्य
<u>'''Pṛṣad-ājya'''</u> denotes ‘sprinkled butter’--that is, butter ('''[[आज्य|Ājya]]''') mixed with sour milk, in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_59> x. 90, 8.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_59> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 6, 2;<br> vi. 3, 9, 6;<br> 11, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 2, 41;<br> 4, 2;<br> iii. 8, 4, 8, etc. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 404, n. 1.</ref>

पृषध्र
<u>'''Pṛṣadhra'''</u> occurs in a [[वालखिल्य|Vālakhilya]] hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_60> viii. 52, 2.</ref> as the name of a man. He is also mentioned in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_60> xvi. 11, 25-27.</ref> as a patron of '''[[प्रस्कण्व|Praskaṇva]],''' and called [[पृषध्र|Pṛṣadhra]] [[मेध्य|Medhya]] [[मातरिश्वन्|Mātariśvan]] (or Mātariśva); but for once there is a discrepancy between the statement of the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] and the text of the Rigveda, for the hymns<ref name=fx3_ve2_60> viii. 55. 56.</ref> there attributed to [[प्रस्कण्व|Praskaṇva]] as in praise of [[पृषध्र|Pṛṣadhra]] have nothing in them connected with [[पृषध्र|Pṛṣadhra]], while the Anukramaṇī (Index) ascribes to [[पृषध्र|Pṛṣadhra]] himself the authorship of one of them.<ref name=fx4_ve2_60> viii. 56.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 39.</ref> On the other hand, '''[[मेध्य|Medhya]]''' and '''[[मातरिश्वन्|Mātariśvan]]''' appear as separate persons in the '''Rigveda'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_60/> along with [[पृषध्र|Pṛṣadhra]].

पृषातक
<u>'''Pṛṣātaka'''</u> is the name of a mixture like '''[[पृषद्आज्य|Pṛṣadājya]],''' and consisting, according to the late Gṛhyasaṃgraha,<ref name=fx1_ve2_61> ii. 59.</ref> of curds ('''[[दधि|Dadhi]]'''), honey ('''[[मधु|Madhu]]'''), and '''Ajya.''' It is mentioned in a late passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_61> xx. 134, 2.</ref> and in the Sūtras.<ref name=fx3_ve2_61> [[मानव|Mānava]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 3, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 35, 580.</ref>

पृष्ट्या
<u>'''Pṛṣṭyā'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_62> So Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.'' Pṛṣṭhyā is read in the St. Petersburg Dictionary. See, however, Grill, ''Hundert Lieder,''^2 169;<br> Bloomfield;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 513.</ref> denotes in the Atharvaveda (vi. 102, 2) the side horse (mare). 

पृष्ट्य्-आमय
<u>'''Pṛṣṭy-āmaya'''</u> denotes in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_63> xix. 34, 10. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 65, 391.</ref> a pain in the sides or ribs.<ref name=fx2_ve2_63> The derivative adjective ''Pṛṇṭyāmayin,'' ‘suffering from a pain in the side,’ occurs in Rv. i. 105, 18.</ref> It appears to be mentioned there merely as an accompaniment of fever ('''[[तक्मन्|Takman]]''').

पेत्व
<u>'''Petva'''</u> is found twice in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_64> iv. 4, 8;<br> v. 19, 2.</ref> In the first passage reference is made to its ''[[वाज|vāja]],'' which Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve2_64> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 229, 230.</ref> argues can only mean ‘strength,’ ‘swiftness,’ though naturally the sense of ‘male power’ would seem more appropriate in a spell intended to remove lack of virility. In the second passage the [[पेत्व|Petva]] is mentioned as overcoming the horse (see '''[[उभयादन्त्|Ubhayādant]]'''), a miracle which has a parallel in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx3_ve2_64> vii. 18, 17.</ref> where the [[पेत्व|Petva]] overcomes the female<ref name=fx4_ve2_64> ''Siṃhyam'' in the text. Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 264, takes it as masculine, and as a play on ''śiṃyum,'' the name of one of the kings or peoples defeated in the battle of the ten kings. But, admitting the play, ''siṃhī'' as fem. seems to be still more pointed than ''[[सिंह|siṃha]],'' contrasting with the masculine ''[[पेत्व|petva]].''</ref> lion. The animal also occurs in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx5_ve2_64> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 22;<br> 1. Though not in the parallel passage of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, it appears to be found in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]], according to Weber's note in his edition of the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.</ref> and occasionally elsewhere.<ref name=fx6_ve2_64> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 8, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxix. 58. 59;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 5, 3. etc.</ref> It appears to be the ‘ram’ or the ‘wether,’ the latter<ref name=fx7_ve2_64> ''Galita-retasko meṣaḥ.''</ref> being the sense given to it by the commentator on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā. But there is no conclusive evidence in favour of this meaning, while on the whole the passage of the Atharvaveda, in which ''[[वाज|vāja]]'' is found, accords best with the sense of ‘ram.’ Hopkins,<ref name=fx8_ve2_64> ''Loc. cit.;<br> India, Old and New,'' 58. He thinks the born of the goat pierced the lion. Curiously enough, Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 253. renders the word a ‘goat’ in Av. v. 19, 2, but (p. 151) as ‘ram’ in iv. 4, 8;<br> and Bloomfield ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 434, speaks Both of a ‘ram’ and a ‘goat’ in connexion with v. 19, 2.</ref> however, renders the word as ‘goat,’ though for what reason is not clear. Whether it is connected in any way with '''[[पित्व|Pitva]]''' or '''Pidva''' is quite uncertain. 

पेदु
<u>'''Pedu'''</u> is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_65> Rv. i. 117, 9;<br> 118, 9;<br> 119, 10;<br> vii. 71, 5;<br> x. 39, 10.</ref> of a protégé of the Aśvins, who gave him, in order, as it seems, to replace a bad steed, a mythical horse, hence called [[पैद्व|Paidva]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_65> Rv. ix. 88, 4;<br> Av. x. 4, 5 ''et seq.''</ref> which probably represents the horse of the sun.<ref name=fx3_ve2_65> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 52, 149.</ref>

पेरुक
<u>'''Peruka'''</u> occurs in an obscure verse of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_66> vi. 63, 9. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 158.</ref> as the name of a patron of the poet.

पेसस्
<u>'''Pesas'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_67> ii. 3, 6;<br> iv. 36, 7;<br> vii. 34, 11;<br> 42, 1.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_67> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 82. 89;<br> xx. 40;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 19, etc.</ref> an embroidered garment such as a female dancer would wear.<ref name=fx3_ve2_67> Rv. i. 92, 4. 5.</ref> The fondness of the Indians for such raiment is noted by Megasthenes<ref name=fx4_ve2_67> See S¤trabo, p. 509, where he refers to a .</ref> and by Arrian,<ref name=fx5_ve2_67> ''Indica,'' 5, 9.</ref> who refer to their . So in one passage<ref name=fx6_ve2_67> Rv. x. 1, 6.</ref> a garment (''[[वस्त्र|vastra]]'') is called ''peśana,'' with which Roth<ref name=fx7_ve2_67> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> happily compares the Roman ''vestis coloribus intexta.'' The making of such garments was a regular occupation of women, as is indicated by the Peśas-kārī, the ‘female embroiderer,’ figuring in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]],<ref name=fx8_ve2_67> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 5, 1.</ref> though the, commentator on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] interprets the word as ‘wife of a maker of gold.’<ref name=fx9_ve2_67> ''Cf.'' perhaps ''suvarṇaṃ hiraṇyaṃ peśalam'' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 4, 5, where ''peśala'' probably refers to cunningly-worked gold. But this does not suit the compound ''peśas-kārī,'' which must denote a ‘maker of ''peśas,''’ and ''peśas'' has not the sense of wrought gold in any passage. ''Cf.'' also Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 4, 5;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 261.</ref> Pischel,<ref name=fx10_ve2_67> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 113-125.</ref> however, thinks that Peśas never means anything but colour or form.

पेसितृ
<u>'''Pesitṛ'''</u> is the name of one of the victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_68> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Bṛāhmaṇa, iii. 4, 8, 1.</ref> The sense is quite  uncertain. The word is rendered by the St. Petersburg Dictionary and by Weber<ref name=fx2_ve2_68> ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 75, n. 5.</ref> as ‘one who cuts in pieces,’ a ‘carver,’ but Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx3_ve2_68> On [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> thinks that it means one who causes an enmity which has been lulled to rest to break out again.

पैङ्ग-राज
<u>'''Paiṅga-rāja'''</u> is the name of one of the victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_69> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 13, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 16;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 34. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 99.</ref> That a bird is meant is certain, but what particular kind is quite unknown.

पैङ्गी-पुत्र
<u>'''Paiṅgī-putra'''</u> (‘son of a female descendant of Piṅga’) is the name of a teacher, pupil of '''[[शौनकीपुत्र|Śaunakīputra]],''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 4, 30 Mādhyaṃdina).<br>==Foot Notes==

पैङ्ग्य
<u>'''Paiṅgya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Piṅga,’ is the name of a teacher who is repeatedly mentioned as an authority in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_71> viii. 9;<br> xvi. 9;<br> xxvi. 3, 4, 14;<br> xxviii. 7. 9;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 2.</ref> where<ref name=fx2_ve2_71> iii. 1;<br> xix. 9;<br> xxiv. 4. ''Cf. Paiṅgī saṃpad,'' xxv. 7. [[पैङ्ग्य|Paiṅgya]] is found also in the Sāṅkhāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 2, 11;<br> xi. 11, 5;<br> 14, 9;<br> xv. 3, 1;<br> xvii. 7, 1, 3;<br> 10, 3;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 11.</ref> also his doctrine is called the [[पैङ्ग्य|Paiṅgya]]. This teacher is further referred to in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_71> xii. 2, 2, 4;<br> 4, 8. (Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 3, 17.)</ref> which also speaks of '''Madhuka''' [[पैङ्ग्य|Paiṅgya]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_71> xi. 7, 2, 8;<br> 16.</ref> It is, of course, impossible to say whether there was only one [[पैङ्ग्य|Paiṅgya]] or several Paiṅgyas. The followers of [[पैङ्ग्य|Paiṅgya]] are called Paiṅgins in the [[निदान|Nidāna]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_71> iv. 7.</ref> and Anupada<ref name=fx6_ve2_71> i. 8;<br> ii. 2, 4, 10;<br> vi. 7;<br> xi. 8.</ref> Sūtras. His text-book is called Paiṅga in the Anupada [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx7_ve2_71> ii. 4;<br> iii. 12;<br> iv. 5.</ref> while the Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx8_ve2_71> v. 15, 8;<br> 29, 4.</ref> mentions a Paiṅgāyani [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. It is clear that [[पैङ्ग्य|Paiṅgya]] was a teacher of a Rigveda school allied to the Kauṣītakis. Paiṅgi is a patronymic of '''[[यास्क|Yāska]]''' in the Anukramanī of the Ātreyī [[शाखा|Śākhā]].<ref name=fx9_ve2_71> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 71, n.;<br> 3, 396.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 44, 45, 404 ''et seq.;<br>'' 2, 295;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 41, 46, 47, 56, 81, 90, 130, etc.</ref> 

पैजवन
<u>'''Paijavana,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[पिजवन|Pijavana]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]].'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_72> Rv. vii. 18, 22. 25;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 24. 25;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 34;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 11, 14.</ref> It seems most probable that [[पिजवन|Pijavana]] intervened in the line of succession between '''Divodāsa''' and [[सुदास्|Sudās]], because the two kings have, according to tradition, quite different Purohitas, the former being served by the '''Bharadvājas''' as his priests, the latter by '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]]''' and '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]];'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_72> See Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie'' 1, 104 ''et seq.''</ref> this is more natural if they were divided by a period of time than if they had been, as is usually supposed, father and son. Geldner,<ref name=fx3_ve2_72> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 115.</ref> however, identifies Divodāsa and [[पिजवन|Pijavana]].

पैद्व
<u>'''Paidva.'''</u> See '''Pedu.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

पोतृ
<u>'''Potṛ'''</u> is the name of one of the priests ('''[[ऋत्व्इज्|Ṛtvij]]''') of the sacrificial ritual. Already known to the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_74> i. 94, 6;<br> ii. 5, 2;<br> iv. 9, 3;<br> vii. 16, 5;<br> ix. 67, 22.</ref> he is frequently mentioned later in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_74> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 10 ''et seq.;<br>'' Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 3, 4, 22;<br> v. 4, 5, 22;<br> xii. 1, 1, 8, etc.</ref> But as Oldenberg<ref name=fx3_ve2_74> ''Religien des Veda,'' 383, 391, 395.</ref> observes, the [[पोतृ|Potṛ]] is not in the later literature a priest of any importance, but is practically a mere name. Judging by the derivation of the name from the root ''pū,'' ‘purify,’ it would seem that he was properly engaged in the purification of the ''Soma [[पवमान|pavamāna]],'' ‘Soma purifying itself,’ and was perhaps employed to sing hymns to this Soma. Potra<ref name=fx4_ve2_74> Rv. ii. 1, 2, and probably i. 76, 4, though the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' gives this as an example of the second use.</ref> denotes both the office and the Soma vessel of the [[पोतृ|Potṛ]].<ref name=fx5_ve2_74> Rv. i. 15, 2;<br> ii. 36, 2;<br> 37, 2. 4.</ref>

पौंश्चलेय
<u>'''Pauṃścaleya'''</u> in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 8, 4, 2) denotes the son of a courtesan (Puṃśealī).<br>==Foot Notes==

पौंसायन
<u>'''Pauṃsāyana'''</u> is the patronymic of '''[[दुष्टरीतु|Duṣṭarītu]]''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xii. 9, 3, 1). <br>==Foot Notes==

पौञ्जि-ष्ठ
<u>'''Pauñji-ṣṭha'''</u> is the form in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_77> x. 4, 9.</ref> the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve2_77> xxx. 8.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_77> iii. 4, 5, 1, where Sāyaṇa glosses it with the word ''[[कैवर्त|kaivarta]],'' also probably the name of a functional caste.</ref> of the word '''[[पुञ्जिष्ठ|Puñjiṣṭha]],''' denoting ‘fisherman.’ It is probably a caste name, ‘son of a [[पुञ्जिष्ठ|Puñjiṣṭha]],’ as the designation of a functional caste.

पौण्डरीक
<u>'''Pauṇḍarīka'''</u> is the patronymic of '''Kṣemadhṛtvan''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xxii. 18, 7).<br>==Foot Notes==

पौत-क्रत
<u>'''Pauta-krata,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[पूतक्रता|Pūtakratā]],'''’ is the metronymic of a man, apparently '''[[दस्यवे वृक|Dasyave Vṛka]],''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_79> viii. 56, 2.</ref> Scheftelowitz<ref name=fx2_ve2_79> ''Die Apokryphen des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 41, 42.</ref> proposes to read [[पूतक्रतु|Pūtakratu]] with the Kashmir MS. of the Rigveda, arguing that in the same hymn Pūtakratāyī, the wife of [[पूतक्रतु|Pūtakratu]], is referred to, and that therefore [[पूतक्रतु|Pūtakratu]] is appropriate, Pūtakratāyī<ref name=fx3_ve2_79> See Pāṇini, iv. 1, 36.</ref> being the feminine, like Manāyī,<ref name=fx4_ve2_79> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 8, 6;<br> Pāṇini, iv. 1, 38. Perhaps also Vasāvī, Rv. x. 73, 4.</ref> for [[मनावी|Manāvī]]. But the ordinary reading in the sense of descendant is perfectly legitimate, as Oldenberg<ref name=fx5_ve2_79> ''Go7ttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen,'' 1907, 237.</ref> has pointed out.

पौतिमाषी-पुत्र
<u>'''Pautimāṣī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of Pūtimāṣa,’ is the metronymic of a teacher in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 5, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

पौति-माष्य
<u>'''Pauti-māṣya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Pūtimāṣa,’ is the patronymic of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[गौपवन|Gaupavana]],''' in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) of the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (ii. 6, 1; iv. 6, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

पौतिमाष्यायण
<u>'''Pautimāṣyāyaṇa,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[पौतिमाष्य|Pautimāṣya]]'''’ is the patronymic of a teacher, who, with '''[[कौण्डिन्यायन|Kauṇḍinyāyana]],''' taught '''[[रैभ्य|Raibhya]],''' in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) of the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (ii. 5, 20; iv. 5, 26). <br>==Foot Notes==

पौत्र
<u>'''Pautra'''</u> (‘descended from a son’) is the regular term for a ‘grandson’ from the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_83> ix. 5, 30;<br> xi. 7, 16;<br> xviii. 43, 9.</ref> onwards.<ref name=fx2_ve2_83> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 10;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 8, 3, etc.</ref> When it is used beside '''Naptṛ,'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_83> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 3, 18;<br> Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 11, 5;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 10, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Delbrūck, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 478.</ref> the latter word must denote ‘great-grandson.’

पौर
<u>'''Paura,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[पूरु|Pūru]],’ is the name of a man, presumably a [[पूरु|Pūru]] prince helped by Indra, in a hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_84> viii. 3, 12.</ref> The Greek  the name of Alexander's rival, is probably the representative of this word. Oldenberg<ref name=fx2_ve2_84> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 362;<br> as also Grassmann, ''Wo7rterbuch, s.v.''</ref> sees the same name in another passage also.<ref name=fx3_ve2_84> v. 74, 4.</ref>

पौरु-कुत्स
<u>'''Pauru-kutsa,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_85> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxii. 3;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 16, 3.</ref> '''Pauru-kutsi,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_85> Rv. vii. 19, 3.</ref> '''Pauru-kutsya,'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_85> Rv. v. 33, 8;<br> viii. 19, 36;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 6, 5, 3.</ref> are variant forms of the patronymic of '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]],''' the descendant of '''[[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]].'''

पौरु-शिष्टि
<u>'''Pauru-śiṣṭi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Puruśiṣṭa,’ is the patronymic of '''[[तपोनित्य|Taponitya]]''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (i. 9, 1 = [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, vii. 8, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

पौर्ण-मासी
<u>'''Paurṇa-māsī,'''</u> denoting the ‘night of the full moon,’ is celebrated in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_87> vii. 80.</ref> as sacred, while it is repeatedly mentioned later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_87> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 9, 1;<br> ii. 2, 2, 1;<br> iii. 4, 9, 6;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 11;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 2, 4, etc.</ref> Gobhila<ref name=fx3_ve2_87> i. 5, 7. Three sorts of full moon are distinguished by Gobhila--that which occurs when the full moon rises at the meeting of day and night (''sandhyā''), when it rises shortly after sunset, or when it stands high in the sky. The two former alternatives are apparently those described in the passage ([[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 11 = [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1) as ''pūrvā'' and ''uttarā.'' See Weber, [[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]], 51;<br> Oldenberg, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 30, 26, n.</ref> defines it as the greatest separation (''vikarṣa'') of the sun and the moon. ''Cf.'' '''[[मास|Māsa]].''' 

पौलुषि
<u>'''Pauluṣi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Puluṣa,’ is the patronymic of '''[[सत्ययज्ञ|Satyayajña]]''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (x. 6, 1, 1) and the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (v. 11, 1). In the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 39, 1) the form is Pauluṣita, which is perhaps merely an error.<br>==Foot Notes==

पौल्कस
<u>'''Paulkasa'''</u> is the name of one of the victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_89> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 17;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 14, 1.</ref> The name also occurs in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_89> iv. 3, 22.</ref> as that of a despised race of men, together with the [[चाण्डाल|Cāṇḍāla]]. The Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve2_89> i. 6, 11.</ref> has the variant [[पुक्लक|Puklaka]] or Pulkaka, clearly the same as Pulkasa, of which [[पौल्कस|Paulkasa]] is a derivative form, showing that a caste is meant (''cf.'' '''[[कौलाल|Kaulāla]], [[पौञ्जिष्ठ|Pauñjiṣṭha]]'''). In the accepted theory<ref name=fx4_ve2_89> ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v., Pukkaśa.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 217, takes [[पौल्कस|Paulkasa]] as a mixed caste.</ref> the Pulkasa is the son of a [[निषाद|Niṣāda]] or [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] by a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] woman, but this is merely speculative; the [[पौल्कस|Paulkasa]] may either have been a functional caste, or, as Fick<ref name=fx5_ve2_89> ''Die sociale Gliederung,'' 206. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 416, n. 6.</ref> believes, an aboriginal clan living by catching wild beasts, and only occasionally reduced to menial tasks.

पौष्कर-सादि
<u>'''Pauṣkara-sādi'''</u> (‘descendant of Puṣkarasādi’) is the name of a teacher mentioned in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx1_ve2_90> vii. 17. ''Cf.'' Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 371.</ref> as well as the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Prātiśākhya.<ref name=fx2_ve2_90> i. 5;<br> ii. 1, 2, 5;<br> Pāṇini, viii. 4, 48;<br> Vārttika, 3;<br> Kielhorn, ''Indian Antiquary,'' 16, 103;<br> Pischel, ''ibid.,'' 34, 26.</ref> A Puṣkarasādi is mentioned in the [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_90> i. 6, 19, 7;<br> 10, 28, 1.</ref> of Āpastamba and elsewhere.

पौष्पिण्ड्य
<u>'''Pauṣpiṇḍya'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[जैमिनि|Jaimini]],''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) at the end of the Sāmavidhāna [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_91> ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 377.</ref>

प्युक्ष्ण
<u>'''Pyukṣṇa'''</u> is found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (v. 3, 1, 11) denoting the ‘covering’ for a bow ('''[[धनुस्|Dhanus]]'''), presumably made of skin. <br>==Foot Notes==

प्रौउग
<u>'''Praūga'''</u> is apparently equivalent to ''pra-yuga,'' denoting the fore part of the pole of the cart, the part in front of the yoke. It is mentioned in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_93> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 4, 11, 1, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxi. 4.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_93> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 2, 9;<br> iii. 5, 3, 4, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 248;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 14, n. 1.</ref> where it is said to be the part of the pole behind the '''[[कस्तम्भी|Kastambhī]],''' or prop on which the pole rests.

प्र-कङ्कत
<u>'''Pra-kaṅkata'''</u> is the name of some noxious insect in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_94> i. 191, 7. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98.</ref>

प्र-करितृ
<u>'''Pra-karitṛ'''</u> is the name of one of the victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_95> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 8, 1. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 315, n. 1;<br> Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 79, n. 6.</ref> The exact sense is uncertain; the commentator Sāyaṇa on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] explains it to mean the ‘divider of dear ones by producing enmity,’ but the sense of ‘sprinkler’--that is, ‘seasoner’--is more likely.

प्र-कश
<u>'''Pra-kaśa'''</u> in the Atharvaveda (ix. 1, 21) seems to mean either the ‘thong’ or the ‘lash’ of a whip.<br>==Foot Notes==

प्र-क्रम
<u>'''Pra-krama,'''</u> ‘stride,’ is mentioned as a measure of distance in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (x. 2, 3, 1 ''et seq.''), but its exact length in unknown.<br>==Foot Notes==

प्रक्ष
<u>'''Prakṣa'''</u> is the form in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_98> vi. 3, 10, 2.</ref> of the usual name, '''[[प्लक्ष|Plakṣa]],''' of a tree, being merely a phonetic alteration for the sake of the etymology. According to Aufrecht,<ref name=fx2_ve2_98> ''Rigveda,'' 2, xlvi. n.</ref> the same word is found in two passages of the [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_98> i. 444;<br> ii. 465.</ref> the same reading occurring in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx4_ve2_98> v. 2, 2, with Keith's notes.</ref> Oldenberg,<ref name=fx5_ve2_98> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 344.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 59.</ref> however, questions the correctness of the reading [[प्रक्ष|Prakṣa]], both in the latter passage and in the [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]]. 

प्रगाथ
<u>'''Pragātha'''</u> is the name given in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka (ii. 2, 2) to the poets of the eighth Maṇḍala of the Rigveda, so called because they composed [[प्रगाथ|Pragātha]] strophes (that is, verses consisting of a Bṛhatī or Kakubh followed by a Satobṛhatī).<br>==Foot Notes==

प्र-घात
<u>'''Pra-ghāta'''</u> is found in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_100> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 1, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiii. 1. The word does not occur in Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 6, 2, 3.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_100> iii. 1, 2, 18.<br><br>''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 10, n. 1.</ref> in the sense of the closely woven ends of a cloth from which depend the loose threads of the '''[[नीवि|Nīvi]],''' or unwoven fringe.

प्र-चलाका
<u>'''Pra-calākā'''</u> in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (vii. 5, 11, 1) and the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā ([[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], v. 2) seems to mean a ‘cloudburst.’<br>==Foot Notes==

प्रजावन्त् प्राजापत्य
<u>'''Prajāvant Prājāpatya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Prajāpati,’ is, according to the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 21), the author of a hymn of the Rigveda (x. 183).<br>==Foot Notes==

प्र-णपात्
<u>'''Pra-ṇapāt'''</u> in the Rigveda (viii. 17, 13) denotes ‘greatgrandson.’<br>==Foot Notes==

प्र-णेजन
<u>'''Pra-ṇejana'''</u> is the word used in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 2, 2, 18) to denote the ‘water used for washing.’<br>==Foot Notes==

प्र-ततामह
<u>'''Pra-tatāmaha,'''</u> ‘great-grandfather,’ is found in the Atharvaveda (xviii. 4, 75).<br>==Foot Notes==

प्र-तर्दन
<u>'''Pra-tardana'''</u> is the name in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_106> xxi. 10.</ref> of a king who had a '''[[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]]''' for his [[पुरोहित|Purohita]]. In the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_106> xxvi. 5.</ref> he appears as arriving at the sacrifice of the [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]] in the Naimiṣa forest, and asking them how errors in the sacrifice could be remedied; and as finding '''Alīkayu Vācaspata,''' the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] priest at the sacrifice, unable to say what was to be  done. In the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_106> iii. 1.</ref> it is said that [[प्रतर्दन|Pratardana]] [[दैवोदासि|Daivodāsi]] went to Indra's world through his death in battle. The patronymic connects him with '''Divodāsa,''' the ancestor or father of '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]],''' and the mention of [[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]] (probably ‘a Bharadvāja’ is meant) as his priest supports the patronymic, for Divodāsa is a special favourite of the singers of the [[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]] family. The name, moreover, is reminiscent of the Tṛtsus (the root ''tard'' appears in both) and of the ''Pratṛdaḥ'' (see '''[[प्रतृद्|Pratṛd]]'''). But he is not in Vedic literature a king of [[काशि|Kāśi]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_106> As in the Epic;<br> Pargiter, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1910, 38</ref> Geldner<ref name=fx5_ve2_106> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 138.</ref> regards him as Divodāsa's son, but this is not likely. ''Cf.'' '''[[प्रातर्दनि|Prātardani]].'''

प्र-तिथि देव-तरथ
<u>'''Pra-[[तिथि|tithi]] Deva-taratha'''</u> is the name of a teacher, pupil of '''Devataras Śāvasāyana''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_107> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373, 385;<br> Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 444.</ref>

प्रति-दीवन्
<u>'''Prati-dīvan'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda (x. 38, 6) and the Atharvaveda (vii. 109, 4) ‘opponent in the game of dice.’<br>==Foot Notes==

प्रति-दुह्
<u>'''Prati-duh'''</u> has the specific sense of ‘fresh milk,’ warm from the cow, in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_109> Av. ix. 4, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 3, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 6, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_109> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 5, 5;<br> xviii. 4, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 3, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 6, 2, etc.</ref>

प्रति-धा
<u>'''Prati-dhā'''</u> apparently means ‘draught’ or ‘pull’ in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_110> viii. 77, 4;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 11.</ref> where Indra is said to have drunk thirty streams (''sarāṃsi'') with one [[प्रतिधा|Pratidhā]].

प्रति-धि
<u>'''Prati-dhi'''</u> is mentioned in the Sūryā hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_111> x. 85, 8.</ref> as part of the chariot on which the bride is taken home. It is  impossible to determine with certainty exactly what is meant; Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_111> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> understands it to mean a cross-piece of wood fastened to the pole.

प्रति-पण
<u>'''Prati-paṇa'''</u> is found in the Atharvaveda (iii. 15, 4) denoting ‘barter’ or ‘exchange.’ ''Cf.'' '''[[पण|Paṇa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

प्रति-प्रश्न
<u>'''Prati-praśna'''</u> occurs in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_113> i. 4, 5, 11;<br> iv. 1, 3, 14;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 131, and 26, 267, renders ''pratipraśnam'' by ‘(went to Prajāpati) for his decision,’ which leaves it ambiguous how he took the passages.</ref> applied to Prajāpati as the decider of doubts; it may have been a technical term for an ‘arbitrator’ (''cf.'' '''[[मध्यमशी|Madhyamaśī]]''' and '''harma''').

प्रति-प्र-स्थातृ
<u>'''Prati-pra-sthātṛ'''</u> is the name of a priest ('''[[ऋत्व्इज्|Ṛtvij]]'''), one of the assistants of the [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]], in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_114> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 3, 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 29;<br> vii. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 2, 2;<br> 3, 13, 22, etc.</ref> He is not mentioned in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_114> Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 384, n. 2.</ref> but mention is once made in that Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve2_114> ii. 16, 5.</ref> of the two Adhvaryus. These may have meant, as later, the [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]] and the [[प्रतिप्रस्थातृ|Pratiprasthātṛ]]. Oldenberg,<ref name=fx4_ve2_114> ''Op. cit.,'' 390, n. 2.</ref> however, thinks that the [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]] and the Agnīdh are intended, a conjecture for which there is some authority.<ref name=fx5_ve2_114> ''Cf.'' Rv. x. 41, 3;<br> [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] in [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 6, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Rituallitteratur,'' 97.</ref>

प्रति-प्राश्
<u>'''Prati-prāś.'''</u> See '''[[प्राश्|Prāś]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

प्रतिबोधी-पुत्र
<u>'''Pratibodhī-putra'''</u> is a wrong reading for '''Prātībodhī-[[पुत्र|putra]].'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_116> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 391;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 244, 310,</ref>

प्रति-मित्
<u>'''Prati-mit'''</u> is found in the description of a house in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_117> ix. 3, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 153;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 596.</ref> The sense must be ‘support’ of some sort, probably beams leaning up at an angle against the '''Upamits.''' 

प्रति-वेश
<u>'''Prati-veśa,'''</u> ‘neighbour,’ occurs, often metaphorically, from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_118> x. 66, 13.</ref> onwards.<ref name=fx2_ve2_118> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 97;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xi. 75;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvi. 9;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 5, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 4, 3.</ref>

प्रति-वेश्य
<u>'''Prati-veśya'''</u> is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) at the end of the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka (xv. 1) as the pupil of '''[[बृहद्दिव|Bṛhaddiva]].''' ''Cf.'' '''[[प्रातिवेश्य|Prātiveśya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

प्रति-श्रुत्का
<u>'''Prati-śrutkā,'''</u> ‘echo,’ shows that this phenomenon had already received a name as early as the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_120> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 14, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 13;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], vii. 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 32;<br> xxx. 19.</ref> and the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iv. 13).

प्रति-ष्ठा
<u>'''Prati-ṣṭhā'''</u> is found in one passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_121> vi. 32, 3 = viii. 8, 21 = [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 14.</ref> where Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve2_121> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 181.</ref> thinks the word is used as a technical term of law; possibly a ‘sanctuary’ may be meant, but it is more than doubtful whether the sense of ‘home’ or ‘abode,’ as given by Roth,<ref name=fx3_ve2_121> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' 3. So a ''[[प्रतिष्ठा|pratiṣṭhā]]-kāma,'' ‘one desirous of a fixed abode,’ [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 3, 4;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxiii. 18, 1, etc.</ref> is not quite adequate. ''Cf.'' '''[[ज्ञातृ|Jñātṛ]].'''

प्रति-सर
<u>'''Prati-sara'''</u> is used in several passages of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_122> ii. 11, 2;<br> iv. 40, 1;<br> viii. 5, 1. 4.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_122> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2, 4, 20;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 30, etc.</ref> to denote an amulet, according to Roth,<ref name=fx3_ve2_122> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' followed by Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 53, n. 2.</ref> because it was a band, and so returned on itself (''prati-sṛ,'' ‘go back’). The sense is doubtful; perhaps ‘attacking’ may really be the root idea.<ref name=fx4_ve2_122> ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, cxxxiii;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 576.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 263;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 345;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 164.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[पुनःसर|Punaḥsara]].''' 

प्रति-हर्तृ
<u>'''Prati-hartṛ'''</u> is the name of the assistant of the Udgātṛ in the list of the sixteen priests ('''[[ऋत्व्इज्|Ṛtvij]]'''). It is found in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_123> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 3, 2, 1.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx2_ve2_123> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 2, 3;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 3, 4, 22;<br> xii. 1, 1, 8;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 15, 3;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 10, 11;<br> 11, 8.</ref> but not in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx3_ve2_123> ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 227.</ref>

प्रती-दर्श श्वैक्न
<u>'''Pratī-[[दर्श|darśa]] Śvaikna'''</u> is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_124> ii. 4, 4, 3.</ref> as sacrificing with the [[दाक्षायण|Dākṣāyaṇa]] offering, and as teaching '''[[सुप्लन् सार्ञ्जय|Suplan Sārñjaya]],''' who thence became '''[[सहदेव|Sahadeva]] [[सार्ञ्जय|Sārñjaya]].''' In a second passage<ref name=fx2_ve2_124> xii. 8, 2, 3.</ref> he is called Pratīdarśa [[ऐभावत|Aibhāvata]], and again brought into connexion with [[सुप्लन् सार्ञ्जय|Suplan Sārñjaya]]. According to Eggeling,<ref name=fx3_ve2_124> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 239, n. 2.</ref> he is to be deemed a king of the Śviknas; apparently, too, he was a descendant of Ibhāvant. A Pratīdarśa is also mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_124> iv. 8, 7.</ref>

प्रतीप प्रातिसत्वन
<u>'''Pratīpa Prātisatvana,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_125> So [[खिल|Khila]], v. 15, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 33, 2.</ref> or '''[[प्रातिसुत्वन|Prātisutvana]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_125> So Av. xx. 129, 2. ''Cf.'' Scheftelowitz, ''Die Apokryphen des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 161;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 18, 1.</ref> is the name of a man mentioned in a hymn of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_125/> Zimmer,<ref name=fx3_ve2_125> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 131.</ref> with great ingenuity, compares the fact that '''[[परिक्षित्|Parikṣit]]''' is mentioned as a '''Kuru''' king in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx4_ve2_125> xx. 127.</ref> and that, according to the Epic genealogies, his grandson was Pratiśravas, with which name [[प्रातिसुत्वन|Prātisutvana]], as very possibly a Prākritized version of Prātiśrutvana may be compared, and his great-grandson was Pratīpa. The identification cannot, however, be regarded as at all certain, and while the Epic may have derived its genealogy from the Atharvaveda, it may have preserved an independent tradition. Bo7htlingk<ref name=fx5_ve2_125> Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> renders ''prātisatvanam'' as ‘in the direction opposed to the Satvans’, and this may be right. 

प्रती-बोध
<u>'''Pratī-bodha'''</u> is mentioned with '''[[बोध|Bodha]]''' in two passages of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_126> v. 30, 10;<br> viii. 1, 13. ''Cf.'' [[मानव|Mānava]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 15, 1.</ref> apparently as the name of a very mythic [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]], ‘Intelligence.’

प्रतृद्
<u>'''Pratṛd'''</u> occurs once in the plural in a hymn of the [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_127> vii. 33, 14.</ref> where it is clearly a variant of the word '''[[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]].''' Moreover, the name of King '''[[प्रतर्दन|Pratardana]],''' a descendant of the [[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]] king, '''Divodāsa,''' confirms the identification of [[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]] and [[प्रतृद्|Pratṛd]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_127> See Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 159;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 138.</ref>

प्र-तोद
<u>'''Pra-toda'''</u> denotes in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_128> xv. 2, 1.</ref> and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_128> xvii. 1, 14. See [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 8;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxii. 4, 10;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 6, 7;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiv. 72, 3. The rendering ‘lance’ seems to have no authority. But see Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 67.</ref> the ‘goad’ of the '''[[व्रात्य|Vrātya]],''' the non-Brahminical Āryan or aborigine. Later the word is regularly used for ‘goad’ in general.

प्रत्यक्ष-दर्शन
<u>'''Pratyakṣa-darśana,'''</u> n., means ‘seeing with one's own eyes,’ as opposed to seeing in a vision (''[[स्वप्न|svapna]]''). A section on such visions appears in the Rigveda Āraṇyakas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_129> Aitareva Āranyaka, iii. 2, 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, viii. 7.</ref>

प्रत्य्-एनस्
<u>'''Praty-enas'''</u> is found with '''Ugra''' and '''[[सूत|Sūta]]-grāmaṇī''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_130> iv. 3, 43. 44 (Mādhyaṃdina = iv. 3, 37. 38 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> clearly denoting an officer of police. The sense must be that of the humbler ‘servants’ of the king<ref name=fx2_ve2_130> Bo7htlingk's Translation, p. 66, where he takes ''ugra'' as an adjective.</ref> rather than ‘magistrates,’ as Max Müller, in his translation, takes it. In the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve2_130> viii. 4 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 463).</ref> and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_130> iv. 16, 16. 17.</ref> the word means, according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, the next heir, who is responsible for the debts of a dead man. 

प्र-दर
<u>'''Pra-dara'''</u> in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_131> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 35, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 10, 7;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 2, 3, 8;<br> xiii. 8, 3, 10, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘cleft’ in the ground.<br><br>^1 [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 8, 5; v. 2, 4, 3; Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxv. 7.

प्र-दिव्
<u>'''Pra-div'''</u> in the Atharvaveda (xviii. 2, 48) is the third and highest heaven, in which the Fathers dwell. In the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xx. 1) it is the fifth of a series of seven heavens.<br>==Foot Notes==

प्र-दिश्
<u>'''Pra-diś,'''</u> like '''[[दिश्|Diś]],''' normally designates only a ‘quarter’ of the sky, or ‘point’ of the compass. Four,<ref name=fx1_ve2_133> Rv. i. 164, 42;<br> vii. 35, 8;<br> x. 19, 8;<br> Av. i. 11, 2;<br> ii. 10, 3.</ref> five,<ref name=fx2_ve2_133> Rv. ix. 86, 29;<br> Av. i. 30, 4;<br> iii. 4, 2;<br> 20, 9.</ref> six,<ref name=fx3_ve2_133> Av. iv. 11, 1;<br> 20, 2;<br> x. 7, 35.</ref> and seven<ref name=fx4_ve2_133> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 32.</ref> such points are enumerated, or more generally ‘all’ are mentioned.<ref name=fx5_ve2_133> Rv. vi. 75, 2;<br> x. 121, 4.</ref> In some passages,<ref name=fx6_ve2_133> Av. v. 28, 2;<br> ix. 2, 21;<br> xix. 20, 2, etc.</ref> on the other hand, the word has the definite sense of an ‘intermediate quarter,’ which is more precisely denoted by ''avāntara-[[दिश्|diś]].''

प्र-धन
<u>'''Pra-dhana'''</u> denotes ‘contest,’ whether the real conflict of war or the competition of the chariot race, in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_134> i. 116, 2;<br> 154, 3;<br> 169, 2;<br> x. 102, 5, etc.</ref>

प्र-धि
<u>'''Pra-dhi'''</u> is the name of some part of the wheel of a chariot, probably the ‘felly.’ In one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_135> ii. 39, 4.</ref> and in one of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_135> vi. 70, 3.</ref> the ‘nave’ ('''[[नभ्य|Nabhya]]''') and the ‘felly’ (''[[प्रधि|pradhi]]'') are mentioned along with the '''[[उपधि|Upadhi]],''' which must then be either a collective name for the spokes or an inner rim within the felly and binding the spokes. In the riddle hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_135> i. 164, 48.</ref> twelve Pradhis are mentioned with three naves, one wheel, and three hundred and sixty spokes; what exactly is here meant by this particular term it would be useless to conjecture, though it is clear that the passage as a whole symbolizes  the year with three seasons, twelve months, and three hundred and sixty days. Elsewhere<ref name=fx4_ve2_135> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 11, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 15;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 5, 23.</ref> the nave and the [[प्रधि|Pradhi]] alone are mentioned, or the [[प्रधि|Pradhi]] occurs by itself.<ref name=fx5_ve2_135> Rv. iv. 30, 15;<br> x. 102, 7, etc. In Av. xviii. 2, 14, ''Pradhāv adhi'' is merely an incorrect variant of the ''pradhāvati'' of Rv. x. 154, 1. The same corruption is seen by Lanman (in Whitney's Translation of the Atharvaveda, xcii) in Av. vi. 70, 3 (n. 2).<br><br>''Cf.'' Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 334;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 248.</ref>

प्र-ध्वंसन
<u>'''Pra-dhvaṃsana.'''</u> See '''[[प्राध्वंसन|Prādhvaṃsana]]'''<br>==Foot Notes==

प्र-पण
<u>'''Pra-paṇa'''</u> in the Atharvaveda (xii. 15, 4. 5) denotes ‘barter’ or ‘exchange,’ balanced by '''[[प्रतिपण|Pratipaṇa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

प्र-पथ
<u>'''Pra-patha'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_138> x. 17, 4. 6;<br> 63, 16.</ref> and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_138> vii. 15.</ref> denotes a ‘long journey.’ Wilson<ref name=fx3_ve2_138> Translation of the Rigveda, 2, 151.</ref> has seen in one passage<ref name=fx4_ve2_138> Rv. i. 166, 9.</ref> the sense of ‘resting-place,’ where travellers can obtain food (''[[खादि|khādi]]''). Zimmer<ref name=fx5_ve2_138> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 231.</ref> shows that this is impossible, and the reading (''prapatheṣu'') in the passage in question is not improbably<ref name=fx6_ve2_138> Roth. St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br> Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 108;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 166. Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' does not follow Roth.</ref> an error for ''prapadeṣu.'' In the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx7_ve2_138> xxxvii. 14 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 466).</ref> the word means a ‘broad road.’

प्र-पथिन्
<u>'''Pra-pathin'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_139> ''Prapathī'' might be the stem, the word occurring as a proper name in the nominative singular only (''cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammer,'' 377, 3);<br> but this is not probable, the stem ''[[प्रपथिन्|prapathin]]'' being otherwise found as an adjective</ref> is the name of a patron, perhaps a Yādava, in one hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_139> viii. 1, 30. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 159;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 90.</ref> 

प्र-पा
<u>'''Pra-pā'''</u> seems to denote a ‘spring’ in the desert in the only Rigveda passage where it occurs.<ref name=fx1_ve2_140> x. 4, 1.</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_140> iii. 30, 6. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 10, 1, 2.</ref> it has merely the sense of ‘drinking,’ or a ‘drink.’

प्र-पितामह
<u>'''Pra-pitāmaha,'''</u> ‘great-grandfather,’ is found in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_141> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 5, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 36;<br> Av. xviii. 4, 35.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_141> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 2, 16;<br> xii. 8, 1, 7.</ref>

प्र-पित्व
<u>'''Pra-pitva'''</u> is found in several passages of the Rigveda as a designation of time. In one passage<ref name=fx1_ve2_142> viii. 1, 29.</ref> the sense is made clear by the context: ‘at the rising of the sun’ (''sūra udite''), ‘at midday’ (''madhyaṃdine divaḥ''), and ‘at the [[प्रपित्व|Prapitva]], bordering on the night’ (''apiśarvare''). In another passage<ref name=fx2_ve2_142> vii. 41, 4.</ref> the sense of ‘late in the day’ also seems adequate, while the phrase<ref name=fx3_ve2_142> iv. 16, 12.</ref> ''abhipitve ahnaḥ,'' ‘at the close of day,’ also denotes the evening. According to Geldner,<ref name=fx4_ve2_142> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 174 ''et seq.''</ref> the sense of the word is the ‘decisive moment’ in a race or a battle, and so the ‘end of the day.’<ref name=fx5_ve2_142> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' took it to mean ‘daybreak’;<br> so also Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 362. Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' on the other hand, gives the meaning as ‘decline of day,’ ‘evening.’ See also Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 24 ''et seq.;<br>'' Oldenberg, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 46, 183 ''et seq.''</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Ahan.'''

प्र-प्रोथ
<u>'''Pra-protha'''</u> is the name in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 4, 1) of a plant used as a substitute for Soma.<br>==Foot Notes==

प्र-फर्वी
<u>'''Pra-pharvī'''</u> denotes a ‘wanton woman’ in the Rigveda (x. 85, 22), the Atharvaveda (v. 22, 7), and the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_144> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 5, 6;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 7, 12;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvi. 12;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xii. 71.</ref>

प्र-बुध्
<u>'''Pra-budh,'''</u> occurring in one passage of the Rigveda (viii. 27, 19), is used in the locative parallel with ''nimruci,'' ‘at the setting (of the sun),’ and clearly means ‘at the rising (of the sun).’ <br>==Foot Notes==

प्र-मगन्द
<u>'''Pra-maganda'''</u> is the name of a prince in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_146> iii. 53, 14.</ref> where he is mentioned as the king of the '''Kīkaṭas,''' and where he seems to be designated by the epithet ''[[नैचाशाख|naicāśākha]],'' ‘belonging to a low branch or race.’ On the other hand, [[यास्क|Yāska]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_146> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 32.</ref> takes [[प्रमगन्द|Pramaganda]] to mean the ‘son of a usurer,’ an explanation that is hardly probable. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx3_ve2_146> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 14-16. 241-245.</ref> thinks that ''[[नैचाशाख|naicāśākha]]'' refers not to [[प्रमगन्द|Pramaganda]], but to the Soma plant, the plant being called ''nīcāśākha,'' ‘having shoots turned downwards,’ and that the passage refers to a raid against the Kīkaṭas, who were not observers of the milk cult or the Soma cult, with the intention of winning their lands where the Soma grew and where there were cows. Bo7htlingk,<ref name=fx4_ve2_146> ''Proceedings of the Saxon Academy,'' December 12, 1891.</ref> however, questions this view, which is not very probable. A place name is possibly meant by [[नैचाशाख|Naicāśākha]].<ref name=fx5_ve2_146> Sāyaṇa, in his introduction to his commentary on the Rigveda, p. 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 31;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 6, 153;<br> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Kommentar,'' 58.</ref> The name [[प्रमगन्द|Pramaganda]] seems un-Āryan.

प्र-मन्दनी
<u>'''Pra-mandanī'''</u> is the name of an Apsaras in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_147> iv. 37, 3.</ref> Probably the word primarily denoted a certain sweet-scented plant, which seems to be the sense of ''pra-manda'' in the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_147> viii. 17;<br> xxv. 11;<br> xxxii. 29;<br> ''niṣpramanda,'' xxxvi. 15. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 69;<br> Caland, ''Altindisches Zauberritual,'' 15, n. 11.</ref>

प्र-मर
<u>'''Pra-mara'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_148> x. 27, 20.</ref> is taken by Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve2_148> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 165.</ref> to be a proper name.

प्र-मोत
<u>'''Pra-mota'''</u> is the name of some sort of disease in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_149> ix. 8, 4.</ref> according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary. Zimmer,<ref name=fx2_ve2_149> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 378, n.</ref> however, thinks that the word must be an adjective meaning ‘dumb.’ This view is accepted, though with doubt, by Whitney<ref name=fx3_ve2_149> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 550.</ref> and by Bloomfield.<ref name=fx4_ve2_149> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 601.</ref> 

प्र-योग
<u>'''Pra-yoga'''</u> is the name of a seer in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_150> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 10, 1;<br> '''[[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,''' xix. 10 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 478).</ref>

प्र-योग्य
<u>'''Pra-yogya'''</u> denotes in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (viii. 12, 3) an animal yoked to a carriage, ‘draught animal.’<br>==Foot Notes==

प्र-लाप
<u>'''Pra-lāpa,'''</u> ‘prattle,’ is found with other words of similar import in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_152> xi. 8, 25.</ref> and in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_152> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 33;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxx. 5;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 17, 6, etc.</ref> of the Rigveda. The phrase '''[[ऐतश|Aitaśa]]-[[प्रलाप|pralāpa]],''' ‘Discourse of [[ऐतश|Aitaśa]],’ occurs as a designation of certain passages of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx3_ve2_152> See Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' pp. 98, 101, n. 12;<br> Scheftelowitz, ''Die Apokryphen des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 159 ''et seq.;<br>'' Macdonell, ''Bṛhaddevatā,'' 2, 323.</ref> The name has no justification in the text itself.

प्र-वचन
<u>'''Pra-vacana'''</u> means ‘oral instruction,’ ‘teaching,’ in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_153> xi. 5, 7, 1.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_153> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 1, 3, 9;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 23;<br> Muṇḍaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 2, 3, etc.</ref>

प्र-वत्
<u>'''Pra-vat,'''</u> ‘height,’ is contrasted with '''[[निवत्|Nivat]],''' ‘valley,’ in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_154> vii. 50, 4.</ref> where it occurs several times.<ref name=fx2_ve2_154> Rv. ii. 13, 2;<br> iv. 17, 7;<br> 22, 4;<br> vi. 17, 12;<br> vii. 32, 27;<br> x. 14, 1;<br> 57, 12;<br> 75, 4.</ref> The word is also found later.<ref name=fx3_ve2_154> Av. i. 13, 2;<br> 26, 3;<br> vi. 28, 3;<br> x. 10, 2;<br> xii. 1, 2;<br> xviii. 4, 7.</ref>

प्र-वर
<u>'''1. Pra-vara'''</u> denotes properly the ‘summons’ addressed to Agni at the beginning of the sacrifice to perform his functions. But as Agni was then invoked by the names of the ancestors of the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_155> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 25. See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 78.</ref> the term [[प्रवर|Pravara]] denotes the series of ancestors invoked.<ref name=fx2_ve2_155> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 1, 9;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 1, 1. 20;<br> iii. 7, 4, 9;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 31, etc.</ref> 

प्र-वर
<u>'''2. Pra-vara,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_156> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 10. in the Mādhyaṃdina recension.</ref> or '''[[प्र-वार|Pra-vāra]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_156> Sāyaṇa on Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ''loc. cit.;<br>'' and [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension, vi. 2, 7.</ref> denotes a ‘covering’ or ‘woollen cloth’ in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].

प्र-वर्त
<u>'''Pra-varta,'''</u> occurring in the description of the '''[[व्रात्य|Vrātya]]''' in the Atharvaveda (xv. 2, 1, ''et seq.''), is explained by the St. Petersburg Dictionary as a ‘round ornament.’ According to the commentator on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (2, 453 ''Bibl. Ind.''), it means an ‘ear-ring.’<br>==Foot Notes==

प्र-वल्हिका
<u>'''Pra-valhikā,'''</u> a ‘riddle,’ is the name given in the Brāhmaṇas of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_158> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 33;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxx. 7.</ref> to certain verses of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_158> xx. 133;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 22;<br> [[खिल|Khila]], v. 16.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 98-100.</ref>

प्र-वात
<u>'''Pra-vāta,'''</u> ‘a windy spot,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_159> x. 34, 1;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 8. Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 119, thinks the reference here is to nuts being blown down in a storm of wind.</ref> as the place where the '''[[विभीतक|Vibhītaka]]''' nuts, used as dice ('''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]]''') grow. In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve2_159> vi. 4, 7, 2.</ref> reference is made to the exposure of decaying matter in such a place.

प्र-वार
<u>'''Pra-vāra.'''</u> See 2. '''[[प्रवर|Pravara]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

प्र-वा¤स
<u>'''Pra-vā¤sa,'''</u> ‘dwelling abroad,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_161> viii. 29, 8.</ref> Ceremonies applicable to one who has returned from foreign residence are given in the Sūtras.<ref name=fx2_ve2_161> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 15;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 17, etc.</ref>

प्र-वाहण जैवलि
<u>'''Pra-vāhaṇa Jaivali'''</u> or '''[[जैवल|Jaivala]]''' (‘descendant of '''Jīvala'''’) is the name of a prince, contemporary with '''Uddālaka,''' who  appears in the Upaniṣads<ref name=fx1_ve2_162> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 1. 7 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 2, 1, 4 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 8, 1;<br> v. 3, 1.</ref> as engaged in philosophical discussions. He is probably identical with the Jaivali of the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_162> i. 38, 4.</ref>

प्र-शस्
<u>'''Pra-śas'''</u> in a [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_163> ii. 6, 5. ''Cf.'' [[दुर्ग|Durga]] on [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 11.</ref> denotes, according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, an ‘axe,’ or some similar instrument for cutting.<ref name=fx2_ve2_163> From ''śas,'' ‘to cut.’</ref>

प्र-शास्तृ
<u>'''Pra-śāstṛ'''</u> is the name of one of the priests ('''[[ऋत्व्इज्|Ṛtvij]]''') at the Vedic sacrifice. In the lesser sacrifices he plays no part at all, but he appears in the animal (''[[पशु|paśu]]'') and Soma sacrifices, in the former as the only, in the latter as the main, assistant of the '''[[होतृ|Hotṛ]]''' priest in the singing of the litanies. He is mentioned by name in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_164> i. 94, 6;<br> ii. 5, 4;<br> ''praśāstra,'' ‘the Soma bowl of the [[प्रशास्तृ|Praśāstṛ]],’ 36, 6;<br> ''praśāstra,'' ‘the office of the [[प्रशास्तृ|Praśāstṛ]],’ ii. 1, 2 = x, 91, 10.</ref> and often later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_164> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 21;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 34;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 6, 6, 6;<br> xi. 5, 5, 9, etc.</ref> He is also in the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_164> iv. 9, 5;<br> vi. 71, 5;<br> ix. 95, 5. According to Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 226, the Upavaktṛ is the earliest equivalent of the Ashāvāka.</ref> called '''Upavaktṛ,''' this name, like [[प्रशास्तृ|Praśāstṛ]], being derived from the fact that one of his chief functions was to issue directions (''[[प्रैष|praiṣa]]'') to the other priests. Another name for him was Maitrāvaruṇa, because his litanies were mainly addressed to [[मित्र|Mitra]] and Varuṇa, a connexion already visible in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx4_ve2_164> ii. 36, 6.</ref> The ‘two divine Hotṛs’ of the Āprī litanies denote, according to Oldenberg,<ref name=fx5_ve2_164> ''Religion des Veda,'' 391. Ludwig, ''op. cit.,'' 3, 227, identifies the [[प्रशास्तृ|Praśāstṛ]] with the '''[[प्रस्तोतृ|Prastotṛ]],''' but this is most improbable.<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''op. cit.,'' 383, 390, 391;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 141 ''et seq.''</ref> the heavenly counterparts of the [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] and the [[प्रशास्तृ|Praśāstṛ]].

प्रश्न
<u>'''Praśna'''</u> denotes generally ‘enquiry’ or ‘disputed question,’ the phrase ''praśnam eti'' having the sense ‘he asks a person for  the decision of a disputed point’ in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_165> ii. 5, 8, 5;<br> 11, 9.</ref> and elsewhere.<ref name=fx2_ve2_165> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 6, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 28.</ref> Thus [[प्रश्न|Praśna]] comes to have the definite meaning of ‘decision in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_165> v. 14.</ref> In the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_165> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 10;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 6, 1.</ref> are included the Praśnin, the [[अभि-प्रश्निन्|Abhi-praśnin]], and the [[प्रश्न|Praśna]]-vivāka; it is quite likely that here the three parties to a civil case are meant--the plaintiff, the defendant, and the arbitrator or judge ('''[[मध्यमशी|Madhyamaśī]]''').

प्रष्टि
<u>'''Praṣṭi,'''</u> like '''[[पृष्ट्या|Pṛṣṭyā]],''' denotes a ‘side horse,’ which, however, possibly<ref name=fx1_ve2_166> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> did not necessarily mean a horse running beside the yoke-horses, but may also have meant a third horse yoked in front as a leader. This seems to be indicated by the reference in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_166> i. 39, 6;<br> viii. 27, 8. In i. 100, 17, ''praṣṭibhiḥ'' seems to refer to the assistants or comrades of '''[[ऋज्राश्व|Ṛjrāśva]]''' (''cf.'' Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 12, 14);<br> but Ludwig thinks that the word refers to the steeds by which a victory was won.</ref> to the [[प्रष्टि|Praṣṭi]]--here applied to the Maruts’ team--leading (''vahati'') the team (''rohitaḥ''). In an obscure passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_166> x. 8, 8. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 597.</ref> there is a reference to the Praṣṭis in connexion with a ''pañca-vāhī,'' ‘drawn by five,’ but it is impossible to gain any clear idea of what is meant. The [[प्रष्टि|Praṣṭi]] is not rarely referred to elsewhere.<ref name=fx4_ve2_166> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 22;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 21, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 3, 9, etc.</ref> In one passage<ref name=fx5_ve2_166> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 12, 5.</ref> the ''dhuryau'' and the ''praṣṭyau'' are mentioned together; this probably means the two horses yoked to the pole, with two others fastened in some way one on each side. The adjectives ''praṣṭimant,''<ref name=fx6_ve2_166> Rv. vi. 27, 24.</ref> ''[[प्रष्टि|praṣṭi]]-[[वाहन|vāhana]],''<ref name=fx7_ve2_166> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2, 4, 9.</ref> ''[[प्रष्टि|praṣṭi]]-vāhin,''<ref name=fx8_ve2_166> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 6, 4;<br> 7, 1, 5;<br> 9, 1;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 13, 12 (where ''praṣṭhi-vāhin'' and ''[[प्रष्टि|praṣṭi]]-vāhin'' are confused).<br><br>Geldner's conjecture, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 119, that [[प्रष्टि|Praṣṭi]] denotes a horse yoked in the middle, is withdrawn by himself, ''Kommentar,'' 97.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 250;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 102.</ref> are all used of '''[[रथ|Ratha]],''' ‘chariot,’ meaning ‘drawn by a side horse (or horses)’ in addition to the yoke-horses. ''Cf.'' '''[[रथ|Ratha]].''' 

प्र-सिति
<u>'''Pra-siti'''</u> in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā (ii. 19) and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 7, 13, 4) denotes a divine ‘missile,’ but does not seem to be used of human combatants.<br>==Foot Notes==

प्र-सू
<u>'''Pra-sū'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_168> i. 95, 10;<br> iii. 5, 8;<br> vii. 9, 3;<br> 35, 7;<br> viii. 6, 20.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_168> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvi. 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 1, 18.</ref> denotes the young shoots of grass or herbs used at the sacrifice.

प्र-सृत
<u>'''Pra-sṛta'''</u> is found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_169> iv. 5, 10, 7;<br> xiii. 4, 1, 5;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 1, 7.</ref> as a measure of capacity, meaning a ‘handful.’<ref name=fx2_ve2_169> Primarily, the word designates the hollowed hand ‘stretched out’ to receive what is offered.</ref>

प्र-स्कण्व
<u>'''Pra-skaṇva'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] who is credited by the Anukramaṇī (Index) with the authorship of certain hymns of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_170> i. 44-50;<br> viii. 49;<br> ix. 95.</ref> where<ref name=fx2_ve2_170> i. 44, 6;<br> 45, 3;<br> viii. 3, 9;<br> 51, 2;<br> 54, 8. ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 17.</ref> he is mentioned several times. The statement in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_170> xvi. 11, 26.</ref> that he obtained bounty from '''[[पृषध्र|Pṛṣadhra]] [[मेध्य|Medhya]] [[मातरिश्वन्|Mātariśvan]]''' is apparently a blunder.<ref name=fx4_ve2_170> Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 39.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 104 ''et seq.''</ref>

प्र-स्तर
<u>'''Pra-stara'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_171> x. 14, 4.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_171> Av. xvi. 2, 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 7, 7, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ii. 18;<br> xviii. 63;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 26;<br> ii. 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 3, 5, etc.</ref> denotes the grass strewn as a sacrificial seat.

प्र-स्तोक
<u>'''Pra-stoka'''</u> is the name of a generous donor in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_172> vi. 47, 22.</ref> where Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve2_172> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 158.</ref> identifies him with '''[[दिवोदास अतिथिग्व|Divodāsa Atithigva]]''' and  '''[[अश्वत्थ|Aśvattha]]''' or Aśvatha. According to the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_172> xvi. 11, 11.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 30, 31;<br> Macdonell, ''Bṛhaddevatā,'' 2, 198 ''et seq.''</ref> '''[[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]]''' obtained gifts from [[प्रस्तोक|Prastoka]] '''[[सार्ञ्जय|Sārñjaya]],''' ‘descendant of [[सृञ्जय|Sṛñjaya]].’

प्र-स्तोतृ
<u>'''Pra-stotṛ'''</u> is the name of an assistant of the Udgātṛ priest who sings the Prastāva,<ref name=fx1_ve2_173> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 10, 7;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 23;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 7, 4, 6;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 10, 9;<br> ii. 2, 1, etc.</ref> or prelude of the Sāman chant. His not being mentioned by name in the Rigveda is merely an accident, for he is clearly referred to in one passage,<ref name=fx2_ve2_173> viii. 81, 5 (''pra stoṣat''). See Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 393, n. 3.</ref> and in the later literature<ref name=fx3_ve2_173> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 3, 2, 1;<br> vi. 6, 3, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 2, 3;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 34;<br> vii. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 2, 5, 3;<br> v. 4, 5, 22;<br> xii. 1, 1, 6, etc.;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 10, 8, etc.</ref> he is a frequent figure. Ludwig<ref name=fx4_ve2_173> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 227.</ref> erroneously thinks that '''[[प्रशास्तृ|Praśāstṛ]]''' is the earlier name of the [[प्रस्तोतृ|Prastotṛ]].

प्रस्रवण
<u>'''Prasravaṇa.'''</u> See '''[[प्लक्ष|Plakṣa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

प्र-हा
<u>'''Pra-hā'''</u> in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_175> x. 42, 9.</ref> the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_175> iv. 38, 3.</ref> and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_175> xvi. 14, 2;<br> xx. 11, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 241, and ''prahāvant,'' Rv. iv. 20, 8, meaning ‘acquiring gain,’ according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> denotes a ‘winning throw’ at dice, or, generally, any ‘gain’ or ‘advantage.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_175/>

प्रा-कार
<u>'''Prā-kāra'''</u> in the Śaṅkhāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xvi. 18, 14) denotes a walled mound supporting a raised platform (''[[प्रासाद|prāsāda]]'') for spectators.<br>==Foot Notes==

प्रा-काश
<u>'''Prā-kāśa'''</u> is found several times in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_177> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 2, 3;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xviii. 9, 10;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 5, 22. etc.</ref> denoting an ornament of metal or a metal mirror. According to Geldner,<ref name=fx2_ve2_177> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 120.</ref> [[प्रावेप|Prāvepa]] has the same sense in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx3_ve2_177> iv. 4, 8.</ref> 

प्रा-गहि
<u>'''Prā-gahi'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xxvi. 4) according to Lindner's edition. ''Cf.'' '''[[प्रावहि|Prāvahi]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

प्राचीन-तान
<u>'''Prācīna-tāna'''</u> denotes the ‘warp’ of a piece of cloth in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (vi. 1, 1, 4). ''Cf.'' '''[[प्राचीनातान|Prācīnātāna]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

प्राचीन-योगी-पुत्र
<u>'''Prācīna-yogī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of Prācīnayoga,’ is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[सांजीवीपुत्र|Sāṃjīvīputra]]''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 4, 32).<br>==Foot Notes==

प्राचीन-योग्य
<u>'''Prācīna-yogya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Prācīnayoga,’ is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[पाराशर्य|Pārāśarya]],''' in the first [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_181> ii. 6, 2 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]]) .</ref> A [[प्राचीनयोग्य|Prācīnayogya]] is mentioned also in the Chāndogya<ref name=fx2_ve2_181> v. 13, 1.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_181> i. 6, 2.</ref> Upaniṣads, and the same patronymic is found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_181> (Of '''[[सत्ययज्ञ|Satyayajña]] [[पौलुषि|Pauluṣi]]''') x. 6, 1, 5;<br> (of '''[[शौचेय|Śauceya]]''') xi. 5, 3, 1. 8 (''cf.'' Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 11). ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 61;<br> 2, 213;<br> 3, 274.</ref> and in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (see '''Puluṣa, [[सत्ययज्ञ|Satyayajña]],'''<ref name=fx5_ve2_181> Called Prācīnayoga in i. 39, 1, but this is probably merely a blunder of the manuscript.</ref> '''Somaśuṣma''').

प्राचीन-वंश
<u>'''Prācīna-vaṃśa'''</u> as an adjective denotes ‘having the supporting beam of the roof facing the east’ in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_182> iii. 1, 1, 6. 7;<br> 6, 1, 23;<br> iv. 6, 8, 20.</ref> and the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx2_ve2_182> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxii. 13;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 1, 3. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 3, n. 2.</ref> The reference is to the central beam running from the middle of the western end of a hall to the middle of the eastern end. This beam was possibly higher than those at the side.

प्राचीन-शाल औपमन्यव
<u>'''Prācīna-śāla Aupamanyava'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[उपमन्यु|Upamanyu]]'''’) is the name of a householder and theologian in the Chāndogya  [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_183> v. 11, 1. See '''[[महाशाल|Mahāśāla]].'''</ref> A Prācīnaśāli appears as an Udgātṛ priest in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_183> iii. 7, 2;<br> 10, 2.</ref> and the Prācīnaśālas are mentioned in the same [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_183> iii. 10, 1.</ref>

प्राचीनातान
<u>'''Prācīnātāna,'''</u> denoting the ‘warp’ of a piece of cloth, is found in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_184> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 12, 3;<br> 17, 2;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 5 (''cf.'' Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 20, n. 2).</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[प्राचीनतान|Prācīnatāna]].'''

प्राचीनावीत
<u>'''Prācīnāvīta'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_185> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 11, 1.</ref> denotes the wearing of the sacred thread of the Āryan over the right shoulder and under the left arm, Prācīnāvītin<ref name=fx2_ve2_185> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 6, 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 2, 2. 9;<br> 6, 1, 8;<br> xii. 5, 1, 6;<br> ''prācīnopavīta'' has the same sense in Av. ix. 1, 24.</ref> being the name for the man so wearing the thread. Tilak,<ref name=fx3_ve2_185> ''Orion,'' 146, citing [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 1.</ref> however, thinks that these terms do not imply the wearing of a thread, but of a garment.

प्राच्य
<u>'''Prācya'''</u> denotes in the plural ‘dwellers in the east.’ They are mentioned in the list of peoples in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_186> viii. 14.</ref> It is very probable that the '''Kāśis, Kosalas, Videhas,''' and perhaps '''Magadhas,''' are meant, as Oldenberg<ref name=fx2_ve2_186> ''Buddha,'' 393, n.</ref> supposes. In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_186> i. 7, 3, 8.</ref> the Easterns are said to call Agni by the name of Śarva, and their mode of making tombs is there<ref name=fx4_ve2_186> xiii. 8, 1, 5;<br> 2, 1. ''Cf.'' also ix. 5, 1, 64. These passages render improbable the earlier view of Weber (''Indian Literature,'' 132, 133) that this [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] is a product of the Eastern peoples, and support his later view that the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], like the other great Brāhmaṇas, belongs to the [[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]] (see '''Kuru,''' n. 1).</ref> referred to with disapproval. The Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_186> viii. 6, 9.</ref> explains the '''[[विपथ|Vipatha]],''' ‘rough car,’ of the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx6_ve2_186> xvii. 1.</ref> as a car of the Easterns (''[[प्राच्य|prācya]]-[[रथ|ratha]]''). In the Saṃhitopaniṣad [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx7_ve2_186> 2;<br> Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 34, n. 25.</ref> reference is made to the PrācyaPāñcālas. 

प्रजापत्य
<u>'''Prajāpatya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Prajāpati,’ is only a patronymic of mythical persons like [[आरुणि|Āruṇi]] Suparṇeya (‘descendant of Suparṇā’) in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka (x. 79), or of '''Prajāvant''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 21).<br>==Foot Notes==

प्राण
<u>'''Prāṇa,'''</u> properly denoting ‘breath,’ is a term of wide and vague significance in Vedic literature. It is frequently mentioned from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_188> i. 66, 1;<br> x. 59, 6;<br> 90, 13, etc.</ref> onwards; in the Āraṇyakas and Upaniṣads it is one of the commonest symbols of the unity of the universe.<ref name=fx2_ve2_188> Deussen, ''Philosophy of the Upanishads,'' 89 ''et seq.''</ref> In the narrow sense [[प्राण|Prāṇa]] denotes one of the vital airs, of which five are usually<ref name=fx3_ve2_188> See '''[[उदान|Udāna]],''' n. 1.</ref> enumerated--[[प्राण|Prāṇa]], '''[[अपान|Apāna]], [[व्य्आन|Vyāna]], [[उदान|Udāna]],''' and '''[[समान|Samāna]];''' but often only two, [[प्राण|Prāṇa]] and [[अपान|Apāna]],<ref name=fx4_ve2_188> Av. ii. 28, 3;<br> v. 4, 7 (Paipp.);<br> vii. 53, 4 (in vii. 53, 3, [[अपान|Apāna]], [[प्राण|Prāṇa]]);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 1, 4, etc.</ref> or [[प्राण|Prāṇa]] and [[व्य्आन|Vyāna]],<ref name=fx5_ve2_188> Av. v, 4, 7;<br> vi. 41, 2, etc.</ref> or [[प्राण|Prāṇa]] and [[उदान|Udāna]];<ref name=fx6_ve2_188> See '''[[उदान|Udāna]],''' n. 3.</ref> or three, [[प्राण|Prāṇa]], [[अपान|Apāna]], and [[व्य्आन|Vyāna]],<ref name=fx7_ve2_188> Av. xiii. 2, 46;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 6, 9;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 23;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 29;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 10;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, viii. 8;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 2, etc.</ref> or [[प्राण|Prāṇa]], [[उदान|Udāna]], and [[व्य्आन|Vyāna]],<ref name=fx8_ve2_188> See '''[[उदान|Udāna]],''' n. 2.</ref> or [[प्राण|Prāṇa]], [[उदान|Udāna]], and [[समान|Samāna]];<ref name=fx9_ve2_188> ''Ibid.''</ref> or four, [[प्राण|Prāṇa]], [[अपान|Apāna]], [[व्य्आन|Vyāna]], and [[समान|Samāna]],<ref name=fx10_ve2_188> Av. x. 2, 13.</ref> or [[प्राण|Prāṇa]], [[अपान|Apāna]], [[उदान|Udāna]], [[व्य्आन|Vyāna]].<ref name=fx11_ve2_188> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] iii. 4, 1.</ref> The exact sense of each of these breaths when all are mentioned cannot be determined.<ref name=fx12_ve2_188> ''Cf.'' Deussen, ''Philosophy of the Upanishads,'' 273 ''et seq.''</ref>

प्राण
<u>'''Prāṇa'''</u> is also used in a wider sense to denote the organs of sense,<ref name=fx13_ve2_189> Colebrooke, ''Miscellaneous Essays,'' 1, 339, 355;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 1.</ref> or as Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx14_ve2_189> On [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 3, 7.</ref> puts it, the ‘orifices of the head,’ etc. These are given as six in one passage of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx15_ve2_189> xiv. 1. 3, 32;<br> 4, 1.</ref> presumably the eyes, ears, and nostrils. More frequently there are stated to be seven in the head, the mouth being then included.<ref name=fx16_ve2_189> Av. ii. 12, 7;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 17;<br> iii. 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 3, 21;<br> vi. 4, 2, 5;<br> xiii. 1, 7, 2;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 9, 10;<br> 6, 8, etc.</ref> Sometimes again they are mentioned  as nine,<ref name=fx17_ve2_189> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 5, 10, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 7, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 2, 5;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxii. 12, 5;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 4, 1;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 2;<br> Av. v. 28, 1;<br> x. 8, 43 (''navadvāram''), etc.</ref> or as seven in the head and two below.<ref name=fx18_ve2_189> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 9, 10;<br> 6, 8.</ref> Ten are counted in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx19_ve2_189> xi. 6, 3, 17, where the eleventh is given as the Ātman.</ref> and the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx20_ve2_189> ii. 77 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 240).</ref> while even eleven are mentioned in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx21_ve2_189> v. 1.</ref> and twelve in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx22_ve2_189> xxxiii. 3.</ref> where the two breasts are added. Exactly what organs are taken to make up the numbers beyond seven is not certain.<ref name=fx23_ve2_189> ''Cf.'' Deussen, ''op. cit.,'' 269;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaha,'' 185, 187.</ref> The tenth is the navel (''[[नाभि|nābhi]]'') in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā;<ref name=fx24_ve2_189> iv. 6, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ix. 16.</ref> when eleven are named the Brahma-[[रन्ध्र|randhra]]<ref name=fx25_ve2_189> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 3.</ref> (suture in the crown) may be included; in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx26_ve2_189> x. 8, 9.</ref> as interpreted by the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx27_ve2_189> ii. 2, 3, 4.</ref> the seventh and eighth are the organs of taste and speech respectively. But usually these make one only, and the eighth and ninth are either in the breast<ref name=fx28_ve2_189> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiii. 3.</ref> or below (the organs of evacuation).<ref name=fx29_ve2_189> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 9, 10;<br> 6, 8.</ref><br><br>The word [[प्राण|Prāṇa]] has sometimes merely the general sense of breath, even when opposed to [[अपान|Apāna]].<ref name=fx30_ve2_189> Av. v. 4, 7 (Paippalāda) . See Blloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 552.</ref> But its proper sense is beyond question ‘breathing forth,’ ‘expiration,’ and not as the St. Petersburg Dictionary explains it, ‘the breath inspired,’ a version due to the desire to interpret [[अपान|Apāna]] as ‘expiration,’ a meaning suggested by the preposition ''apa,'' ‘away.’ This being clearly shown both by the native scholiasts<ref name=fx31_ve2_189> Rudradatta on Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 8, 8;<br> xiv. 11, 1;<br> Sāyaṇa on Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 3, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 6, 4;<br> Śaṅkara on Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 3, 2;<br> Ānartīya on [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vi. 8, 1, 2, etc.</ref> and by other evidence,<ref name=fx32_ve2_189> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 2, 15, as compared with Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 8, 29;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 2, 2;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 60, 5;<br> ii. 1, 16. 19;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 1, 4. See Caland, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 55, 261-265;<br> 56, 556-558;<br> and '''[[अपान|Apāna]].'''</ref> Bo7htlingk<ref name=fx33_ve2_189> ''Zeitschrift,'' 55, 518.</ref> later accepted the new view. 

प्राण-भृत्
<u>'''Prāṇa-bhṛt'''</u> denotes a ‘living being’ or ‘man’ in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_190> i. 5, 22;<br> iii. 1, 12.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_190> xi. 2, 6, 2.</ref> Prānin has the same sense.<ref name=fx3_ve2_190> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 13;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 4, 2, 2;<br> x. 4, 2, 2;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 11, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]. iii. 3, 3;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 36.</ref>

प्रातर्
<u>'''Prātar'''</u> as a denotation of time signifies the ‘early morning’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_191> i. 125, 1;<br> ii. 18, 1;<br> iii. 41, 2;<br> 52, 1;<br> iv. 35, 7;<br> v. 76, 3, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_191> Av. iv. 11, 12;<br> vi. 128, 2;<br> vii. 101, 1;<br> xi. 2, 16;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxii. 7;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 31;<br> iii. 22. 44;<br> iv. 20;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 1, 12;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 11, 7, etc.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Ahan.'''

प्रातर्-अनुवाक
<u>'''Prātar-anuvāka'''</u> occurs in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_192> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 9, 7;<br> ii. 2, 3, 6;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 15. 17. 18;<br> iv. 10;<br> v. 33;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 9, 3, 7;<br> iv. 3, 4, 21;<br> xi. 5, 5, 9;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 24, 3;<br> iv. 16, 2, etc.</ref> as the name of the litany which begins the morning Soma libation.

प्रातर्-अह्न कौहल
<u>'''Prātar-ahna Kauhala'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[केतु वाज्य|Ketu Vājya]],''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_193> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372;<br> Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 443.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[कौहड|Kauhaḍa]].'''

प्रा-तर्दनि
<u>'''Prā-tardani,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[प्रतर्दन|Pratardana]],'''’ is the name of a prince in one passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_194> vi. 27, 8. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 157, 159.</ref>

प्राति-पीय
<u>'''Prāti-pīya'''</u> is the patronymic of '''[[बल्हिक|Balhika]]''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xii. 9, 3, 3).<br>==Foot Notes==

प्राति-वेश्य
<u>'''Prāti-veśya'''</u> is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka (xv. 1) as a pupil of '''[[प्रतिवेश्य|Prativeśya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

प्राति-सुत्वन
<u>'''Prāti-sutvana.'''</u> See '''Pratīpa.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

प्रति-बोधी-पुत्र
<u>'''Prati-bodhī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of Pratī-  [[बोध|bodha]],’ is the name of a teacher in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] (iii. 1, 5) and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] (vii. 13) Āraṇyakas.<br><br>''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 244, 310.<br>==Foot Notes==

प्रा-तृद
<u>'''Prā-tṛda,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[प्रतृद्|Pratṛd]],'''’ is the patronymic of a teacher called '''[[भाल्ल|Bhālla]]''' in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 31, 4), and of another teacher in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (v. 13, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

प्रा-देश
<u>'''Prā-deśa'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_200> ‘Formed with the ''pradeśa''’ (probably ‘indicator,’ as a name of the forefinger;<br> ''cf. pradeśinī,'' ‘forefinger,’ Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 7;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 10, 1;<br> ii. 9, 14).</ref> frequently occurs in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_200> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 4, 5;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 18, 1, etc.</ref> as a measure of length, a ‘span.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_200> That is, between thumb and forefinger.</ref>

प्रा-ध्वंसन
<u>'''Prā-dhvaṃsana,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[प्रध्वंसन|Pradhvaṃsana]],’ is the patronymic, in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_201> ii. 5, 22;<br> iv. 5, 28. Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> of the mythical '''[[मृत्यु|Mṛtyu]],''' who is there said to be the pupil of [[प्रध्वंसन|Pradhvaṃsana]].

प्रायश्-चित्त
<u>'''Prāyaś-citta'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_202> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 4, 1, 6;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 9;<br> vi. 12, etc.</ref> or '''Prāyaś-citti'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_202> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 4, 1;<br> iii. 1, 3, 2;<br> v. 1, 9, 3;<br> 3, 12, 1;<br> Av. xiv. 1, 30;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxix. 12;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 11, 46;<br> v. 27;<br> vii. 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 4, 9;<br> iv. 5, 7, 1;<br> xi. 5, 3, 8, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘penance’ or ‘expiation,’ both words occurring frequently in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas. The penances are prescribed for every conceivable sort of ritual, social or moral; a complete list of them is included in the Sāmavidhāna [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_202> See Konow's Translation, p. 43 ''et seq.''</ref>

प्रा-वरेय
<u>'''Prā-vareya,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[प्रवर|Pravara]],’ is the patronymic of the '''Gargas''' in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve2_203> xiii. 12 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 474).</ref>

प्रा-वहि
<u>'''Prā-vahi'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xxvi. 4), where, however, Lindner's edition has '''[[प्रागहि|Prāgahi]].''' <br>==Foot Notes==

प्रा-वाहणि
<u>'''Prā-vāhaṇi,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Pravāhaṇa,'''’ is the patronymic of a man called '''Babara''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (vii. 1, 10, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

प्रा-वृष्
<u>'''Prā-vṛṣ'''</u> is the name of the ‘rainy season’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_206> vii. 103, 3. 9.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_206> Av. xii. 1, 46;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvi. 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 4, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 2, 3;<br> vii. 2, 4, 26, etc.</ref>

प्रा-वेप
<u>'''Prā-vepa.'''</u> See '''[[प्राकाश|Prākāśa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

प्राश्
<u>'''Prāś'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_208> ii. 27, 1, 7.</ref> denotes a ‘debater’ or a ‘debate,’ while [[प्रतिप्राश्|Pratiprāś]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_208> ii. 27, 1. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 7, 479 ''et seq.;<br> Atharvaveda,'' 73;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 305, 306, who completely disproves the theory that [[प्राश्|Prāś]] meant ‘means of life,’ ‘victuals’ (''cf.'' Bo7htlingk, ''s.v. [[प्रतिप्राश्|pratiprāś]]'').</ref> denotes an ‘opponent in debate.’

प्राश्नी-पुत्र
<u>'''Prāśnī-putra'''</u> (‘son of Prāśnī’) '''[[आसुरि-वासिन्|Āsuri-vāsin]]''' is mentioned in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_209> vi. 4, 33 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 5, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> as a pupil of '''[[आसुरायण|Āsurāyaṇa]].'''

प्रा-श्रवण
<u>'''Prā-śravaṇa.'''</u> See '''[[प्रास्रवण|Prāsravaṇa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

प्रा-सच
<u>'''Prā-saca,'''</u> m., in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_211> vii. 5, 11, 1;<br> according to the commentator, ‘congealing.’</ref> denotes a ‘cloudburst,’ while in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_211> iii. 12, 7, 4;<br> according to the commentator, ‘congealed’ (water).</ref> the adjective ''prāsacyaḥ (āpaḥ)'' means ‘(waters) produced by torrential rain.’

प्रा-साद
<u>'''Prā-sāda'''</u> in the sense of ‘palace’ does not occur until the late Adbhuta [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_212> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 40.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[प्राकार|Prākāra]].''' 

प्रा-स्रवण
<u>'''Prā-sravaṇa'''</u> occurs as part of the local name '''[[प्लक्ष प्रास्रवण|Plakṣa Prāsravaṇa]].''' It also appears as a patronymic ‘descendant of [[प्रस्रवण|Prasravaṇa]],’ applied to '''[[अवत्सार|Avatsāra]]''' in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_213> xiii. 3. There is also a various reading, [[प्राश्रवण|Prāśravaṇa]].</ref>

प्रियङ्गु
<u>'''Priyaṅgu'''</u> denotes ‘panic seed’ (''Panicum italicum'') in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_214> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 11, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, x. 11;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 12.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_214> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 14, 6 [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 16;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 3, 22 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 3, 13 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]), with Śaṅkara's note.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 241.</ref>

प्रिय-मेध
<u>'''Priya-medha'''</u> is the name of a seer in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_215> i. 139, 9;<br> viii. 5, 25;<br> ''Priyamedhavat,'' i. 45, 3;<br> ''[[प्रियमेध|Priyamedha]]-stuta,'' viii. 6, 45.</ref> where his family, the Priyamedhas, are also repeatedly alluded to.<ref name=fx2_ve2_215> i. 45, 4;<br> viii. 2, 37;<br> 3, 16;<br> 4, 20;<br> 8, 18;<br> 69, 8;<br> 87, 3;<br> x. 73, 11.</ref> It is not probable that any hymns are really Priyamedha's own composition.<ref name=fx3_ve2_215> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 217.</ref> See also '''[[प्रैयमेध|Praiyamedha]].'''

प्रिय-रथ
<u>'''Priya-ratha'''</u> is the name of a patron of the '''Pajras''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_216> i. 122, 7. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 150.</ref>

प्रिय-व्रत सोमापि
<u>'''Priya-[[व्रत|vrata]] Somāpi'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_217> vii. 34.</ref> or '''[[सौमापि|Saumāpi]]''' is the name of a teacher in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_217/> and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx2_ve2_217> xv. 1.</ref> in which he is said to be the son of '''Somapa.''' The name Priyavrata is also found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_217> x. 3, 5, 14.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 8, 136, n.</ref> where a '''[[रौहिणायन|Rauhiṇāyana]]''' of that name is mentioned as a teacher.

प्रेङ्ख
<u>'''Preṅkha,'''</u> ‘swing,’ is mentioned in the description of the Mahāvrata rite, given in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve2_218> xxxiv. 5.</ref> the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]]  Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx2_ve2_218> i. 2, 3. 4;<br> v. 1, 3, etc.</ref> the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_218> v. 5, 7.</ref> and elsewhere.<ref name=fx4_ve2_218> Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, ii. 17, etc.</ref> As far as can be judged from the notices available,<ref name=fx5_ve2_218> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvii. 1 11;<br> 7, 2, etc.</ref> the swing was made just like a modern swing. See also '''[[प्लेङ्ख|Pleṅkha]].'''

प्रेत
<u>'''Preta,'''</u> ‘departed,’ is used to denote a ‘dead man’ in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_219> x. 5, 2, 13;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 11, 1, etc.</ref> but not in the sense of ‘ghost,’ which only appears later, in post-Vedic literature.

प्रेदि
<u>'''Predi.'''</u> See '''Proti.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

प्रेष्य
<u>'''Preṣya'''</u> (‘to be sent’ on an errand) denotes a menial servant or slave, being applied in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_221> vii. 29. See also [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 1.</ref> to the '''[[शूद्र|Śūdra]].''' In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_221> v. 22, 14.</ref> the adjective ''praiṣya,'' ‘menial,’ occurs.

प्रैय-मेध
<u>'''Praiya-medha,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[प्रियमेध|Priyamedha]],'''’ is a patronymic of the priests who sacrificed for the '''[[आत्रेय|Ātreya]] Udamaya''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_222> viii. 22.</ref> They appear in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx2_ve2_222> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 474);<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 8, 7;<br> Lévi, ''La doctrine du sacrifice,'' 150.</ref> as priests who ‘knew all’ (sacrificial lore). Three Praiyamedhas are referred to in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_222> ii. 1, 9, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> In the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_222> i. 3, 15. The name is also written Prayyamedha and, incorrectly, Praiyyamedha.</ref> they are called '''Bharadvājas.'''

प्रैष
<u>'''Praiṣa'''</u> is a liturgical term meaning ‘direction’ or ‘invitation,’ repeatedly found in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_223> Av. v. 26, 4;<br> xi. 7, 18;<br> xvi. 7, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 3, 11, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 19, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_223> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 13;<br> iii. 9;<br> v. 9, etc.;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 3, 15;<br> xiii. 5, 2, 23;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxviii. 1, etc.</ref> 

प्रोति कौशाम्बेय कौसुरु-बिन्दि
<u>'''Proti [[कौशाम्बेय|Kauśāmbeya]] Kausuru-bindi'''</u> (‘descendant of '''Kusurubinda'''’) is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_224> xii. 2, 2, 13. In the parallel passage, Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 24, [[प्रेदि|Predi]] [[कौशाम्बेय|Kauśāmbeya]] Kausuravinda is the form of the name.</ref> as a pupil and contemporary of '''Uddālaka.''' In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve2_224> vii. 2, 2, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' p. 115.</ref> on the other hand, Kusurubinda is called '''[[औद्दालकि|Auddālaki]],''' ‘descendant of Uddālaka,’ a fact which seems to indicate that little value is to be attached to these patronymics and allegations of contemporaneousness.

प्रोष्ठ
<u>'''Proṣṭha,'''</u> denoting perhaps a ‘bench,’ is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_225> vii. 55, 8.</ref> in the adjective ''proṣṭhaśaya,'' ‘lying on a bench,’ used of women, and uncompounded in the Taittīriya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_225> ii. 7, 17, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 154.</ref> In the first passage it is distinguished from '''[[तल्प|Talpa]]''' and '''[[वह्य|Vahya]],''' but what the exact difference was there is not sufficient evidence to show.

प्रोष्ठ-पद
<u>'''Proṣṭha-pada,'''</u> m., '''-padā,''' f. (‘foot of a bench’), is the name of a double '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

प्रोष्ठ-पाद वारक्य
<u>'''Proṣṭha-[[पाद|pāda]] Vārakya'''</u> is mentioned in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 41, 1) as a pupil of [[कंस|Kaṃsa]] [[वारकि|Vāraki]].<br>==Foot Notes==

प्लक्ष
<u>'''1. Plakṣa'''</u> is the name of the waved leaf fig-tree (''Ficus infectoria''), a large and beautiful tree with small white fruit. It is mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_228> v. 5, 5.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve2_228> vii. 4, 12, 1. ''Cf.'' iii. 4, 8, 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 10, 2.</ref> along with the '''[[न्यग्रोध|Nyagrodha]]''' and the '''[[पर्ण|Parṇa]].''' Its name is altered in the latter Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve2_228> vi. 3, 10, 2.</ref> to '''[[प्रक्ष|Prakṣa]]''' for the sake of an etymology. It is also mentioned in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx4_ve2_228> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 32;<br> viii. 16;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 19, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 3, 10, 12, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 58.</ref> 

प्लक्ष दय्यांपाति
<u>'''2. Plakṣa Dayyāṃpāti'''</u> (‘descendant of Dyāṃpati’ or Dyāṃpāta) was a contemporary of '''[[अत्य्अंहस् आरुणि|Atyaṃhas Āruṇi]]''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 10, 9, 3. 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

प्लक्ष प्रा-स्रवण
<u>'''3. Plakṣa Prā-sravaṇa'''</u> is the name of a locality, forty-four days’ journey from the spot where the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]''' disappears. It is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_230> xxv. 10, 16. 22;<br> Kātyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxiv. 6, 7;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 17, 12. 14.</ref> and the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_230> iv. 26, 12.</ref> In the latter text it is said that the middle of the earth is only a span ('''[[प्रादेश|Prādeśa]]''') to the north of it. In the Rigveda Sūtras<ref name=fx3_ve2_230> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 6, 1;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 29, 24.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 31, n. 2.</ref> the locality is called Plākṣa [[प्रस्रवण|Prasravaṇa]], and is apparently meant to designate the source of the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] rather than the place of its reappearance.

प्लति
<u>'''Plati'''</u> is the name of a man, the father of the seer of two hymns of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_231> x. 63, 17;<br> 64, 17. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 133.</ref>

प्लव
<u>'''1. Plava'''</u> (‘float’) denotes a ‘boat’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_232> i. 182, 5.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_232> Av. xii. 2, 48;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 3, 10, 2;<br> vii. 3, 5, 2;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 10, 17, etc.</ref>

प्लव
<u>'''2. Plava'''</u> is the name of an aquatic bird mentioned in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_233> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 20, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 15;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 34.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 93.</ref> Perhaps the ‘pelican’ is meant.

प्लाक्षि
<u>'''Plākṣi,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[प्लक्ष|Plakṣa]],'''’ is the name of a man mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx1_ve2_234> i. 7, 2.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]]  Prātiśākhya.<ref name=fx2_ve2_234> i. 5. 9;<br> ii. 2. 6.</ref> In the same Prātiśākhya<ref name=fx3_ve2_234> i. 9;<br> ii. 2. 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 35.</ref> a Plākṣāyaṇa, or ‘descendant of Plākṣa,’ is mentioned.

प्लात
<u>'''Plāta,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[प्लति|Plati]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''Gaya''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (v. 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

प्ला-योगि
<u>'''Plā-yogi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Playoga,’ is the patronymic of '''Āsaṅga''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_236> viii. 1, 33.</ref> According to the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_236> xvi. 11, 17.</ref> Āsaṅga was a woman, but became a man. This version, repeated by Sāyaṇa in his commentary on the Rigveda,<ref name=fx3_ve2_236> viii. 1, 34. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Religions of India,'' 150.</ref> is a mere blunder based on the fact that an additional verse, tacked on to the hymn,<ref name=fx3_ve2_236/> contains the expression ''[[शश्वती|śaśvatī]] [[नारी|nārī]],'' which has been taken to mean ‘his wife [[शश्वती|Śaśvatī]],’<ref name=fx4_ve2_236> So even Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 107. But see Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 354.</ref> instead of merely ‘every woman.’

प्लाशुक
<u>'''Plāśuka'''</u> is found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (v, 3, 3, 2) as an epithet of '''[[व्रीहि|Vrīhi]],''' ‘rice,’ in the sense of ‘shooting up rapidly.’<br>==Foot Notes==

प्लीहा-कर्ण
<u>'''Plīhā-karṇa'''</u> as an epithet of cattle in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_238> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 13, 5 (''cf.'' iv. 2, 9);<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 24.</ref> probably denotes ‘having a spleen-shaped mark branded on the ear,’ not as Mahīdhara in his commentary on the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve2_238> ''Loc. cit.''</ref> takes it, ‘having a disease called Plīhan in the ear.’

प्लुष्
<u>'''Pluṣ'''</u> is the name of some noxious insect in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_239> i. 191, 1.</ref> It is also included in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]]  (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx2_ve2_239> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 20.</ref> and is mentioned in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_239> i. 3, 24.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98.</ref> Possibly a species of ant may be meant.

प्लेङ्ख
<u>'''Pleṅkha'''</u> is a variant form of '''[[प्रेङ्ख|Preṅkha]],''' ‘swing,’ found in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (vii. 5, 8, 5) and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 2, 6, 6).<br>==Foot Notes==

फण
<u>'''Phaṇa'''</u> occurs in some manuscripts of the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_241> i. 4. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 398;<br> Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 19, n. 1.</ref> and is explained as meaning an ‘ornament.’ But it is merely a misreading of the correct word ''[[फल|phala]]'' in the compound ''phalahastāḥ,'' ‘bearing fruits in their hands.’

फर्वर
<u>'''Pharvara,'''</u> a word occurring only once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_242> x. 106, 2.</ref> cannot be interpreted with certainty. It may mean a ‘field in bloom.’<ref name=fx2_ve2_242> ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 260.</ref> Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx3_ve2_242> In his commentary on Rv. x. 106, 2. He explains the intensive form ''parpharat,'' occurring in the same hymn (x. 106, 7), as from a verb meaning to ‘fill.’</ref> explains it as ‘filler,’ and Grassmann as perhaps a ‘sower.’<ref name=fx4_ve2_242> ''Wo7rterbuch, s.v.''</ref>

फल
<u>'''Phala,'''</u> denoting ‘fruit’ generally, especially the fruit of a tree, occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_243> iii. 45, 4;<br> x. 146, 5.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_243> Av. vi. 124, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 3, 14, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 13;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 4, 8;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 1, etc., and see '''[[फण|Phaṇa]].'''</ref>

फलक
<u>'''Phalaka'''</u> denotes ‘plank,’ as applied in the construction of a cart or chariot, or as used for pressing Soma (''adhi-ṣavaṇe phalake''),<ref name=fx2_ve2_244> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] vii. 30.</ref> or for any other purpose.<ref name=fx3_ve2_244> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 4, 9;<br> xiii. 4, 3, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 2, 3 (of the swing), etc.</ref><br><br>^1Pañcaviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 1, 14 (''cf. Indische Studien,'' 1, 33, 44). 

फलवती
<u>'''Phalavatī,'''</u> ‘fruitful,’ is the name of a plant in the Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_245> v. 2. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Omina und Portenta,'' 315.</ref> identified by the scholiast with the '''[[प्रियङ्गु|Priyaṅgu]].'''

फल्गु
<u>'''Phalgu.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

फल्गुनी
<u>'''Phalgunī.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

फाण्ट
<u>'''Phāṇṭa'''</u> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_248> iii. 1, 3, 8. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 14, n. 1.</ref> is said to denote the first particles of butter produced by churning, ‘creamy butter.’

फाल
<u>'''Phāla,'''</u> ‘ploughshare,’ occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_249> iv. 57, 8;<br> x. 117, 7.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_249> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xix. 1. ''Cf. suphāla,'' Av. iii. 17, 5;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 7, 12;<br> ''[[फाल|phāla]]-kṛṣṭa,'' ‘growing on ploughed land,’ as opposed to ''āraṇya,'' ‘wild,’ [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 7;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 15.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[लाङ्गल|Lāṅgala]].'''

बक दाल्भ्य
<u>'''Baka Dālbhya'''</u> (‘descendant of Dalbha’) is the name of a person mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] as constraining Indra for the '''Ājakeśins''' (i. 9, 2), and as a '''KuruPañcāla''' (iv. 7, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

बकुर
<u>'''Bakura'''</u> is mentioned in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_251> i. 117, 21.</ref> where it is said that the Aśvins made light for the Āryan by blowing their [[बकुर|Bakura]] against the '''Dasyus.''' According to the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_251> vi. 25. ''Cf.'' Naighaṇṭuka, iv. 3.</ref> the thunderbolt<ref name=fx1_ve2_251/> is meant; but much more probable is Roth's<ref name=fx3_ve2_251> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 290;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 466.</ref> view, that the object blown was a musical instrument. See also '''[[बाकुर|Bākura]].''' 

बज
<u>'''Baja'''</u> is the name in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_252> viii. 6, 3. 6. 7. 24.</ref> of a plant used against a demon of disease. Some sort of mustard plant may be meant.<ref name=fx2_ve2_252> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 494.</ref>

बदर
<u>'''Badara'''</u> denoting, like '''[[कर्कन्धु|Karkandhu]]''' and '''[[कुवल|Kuvala]],''' a kind of jujube, is mentioned in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_253> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 10;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 22, 90;<br> xxi. 30.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_253> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 5, 1;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 4, 10;<br> xii. 7, 1, 3;<br> 2, 9;<br> 9, 1, 8, etc.;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 156, 5.</ref>

बद्वन्
<u>'''Badvan'''</u> seems in one passage of the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_254> i. 1, 4. ''Cf.'' Lāṭyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 1, 23.</ref> to denote a ‘causeway.’ It is said to be firmer than an ordinary road.

बन्धन
<u>'''Bandhana'''</u> denotes a ‘rope’ or other fastening in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_255> Av. iii. 6, 7 (of a boat, '''Nau''');<br> vi. 14, 2.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_255> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 1, 6, 2 (of a horse);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 9, 4;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 8, 2;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], xii. 38, etc.</ref>

बन्धु
<u>'''Bandhu,'''</u> denoting ‘relationship’<ref name=fx1_ve2_256> Rv. v. 73, 4;<br> vii. 72, 2;<br> viii. 73, 12, etc.;<br> Av. v. 11, 10, 11;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iv. 22;<br> x. 6, etc.</ref> in the abstract and ‘relation’<ref name=fx2_ve2_256> Rv. i. 164, 33;<br> vii. 67, 9;<br> Av. x. 10, 23;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7, 5, 5, etc.;<br> ''bandhumant,'' ‘having relations,’ Rv. viii. 21, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 5, 1, 4, etc.</ref> in the concrete, occurs in the Rigveda and later.

बबर प्रा-वाहणि
<u>'''Babara Prā-vāhaṇi'''</u> (‘descendant of '''Pravāhaṇa'''’) is the name of a man who, according to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve2_257> vii. 1, 10, 2. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 148.</ref> wished to become an orator, and obtained rhetorical power by the use of the Pañcarātra sacrifice. 

बभ्रु
<u>'''1. Babhru'''</u> is the name, in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_258> v. 30, 11. 14.</ref> of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] who received gifts from King '''[[ऋणंचय|Ṛṇaṃcaya]].''' The same [[बभ्रु|Babhru]] may be meant in another passage,<ref name=fx2_ve2_258> viii. 22, 10.</ref> where he is mentioned as a protégé of the Aśvins; but it is doubtful whether the word is a proper name at all in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx3_ve2_258> iv. 29, 2. It is here taken as a proper name by the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 126. But Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 199, denies that a proper name is meant.<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 214.</ref>

बभ्रु कौम्भ्य
<u>'''2. Babhru Kaumbhya'''</u> (‘descendant of Kumbha’) is the name of the seer of a Sāman or Chant in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xv. 3, 13).<br>==Foot Notes==

बभ्रु दैवा-वृध
<u>'''3. Babhru Daivā-vṛdha'''</u> is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 34) as a pupil of '''[[पर्वत|Parvata]]''' and '''[[नारद|Nārada]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

बम्ब आज-द्विष
<u>'''Bamba Āja-dviṣa'''</u> (‘descendant of Aja-dviṣ’) is mentioned as a teacher in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ii. 7, 2). [[बिम्ब|Bimba]] is a various reading.<br>==Foot Notes==

बम्बा-विश्ववयसौ
<u>'''Bambā-Viśvavayasau'''</u> are the names, in the form of a compound, of two [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]] who, according to the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve2_262> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 6, 8, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā xxix. 7, where the reading adopted in the text is Bambhā, though the reading of the Berlin manuscript is Bambhār. The name is taken to be Bambā by the St. Petersburg Dictionary;<br> but Bamba is possible, the Dvandva compound accounting for the form with ''ā.'' The Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 7, 3, has Bamba-.</ref> invented a certain rite.

बरासी
<u>'''Barāsī'''</u> is found in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_263> xv. 4.</ref> and the Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmana<ref name=fx2_ve2_263> xviii. 9, 16 (where the commentator explains it as made of bark);<br> xxi. 3, 4.</ref> denoting a garment of some kind.

बरु
<u>'''Baru'''</u> is the name of the author of a hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_264> x. 96.</ref> according to the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_264> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 25;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 8.</ref> of that Veda. 

बर्कु वार्ष्ण
<u>'''Barku Vārṣṇa'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[वृषन्|Vṛṣan]]'''’) is the name of a teacher in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_265> i. 1, 1, 10;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1, 8 (Mādhyaṃdina = iv. 1, 4 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref>

बर्हिस्
<u>'''Barhis'''</u> is found repeatedly in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_266> i. 63, 7;<br> 108, 4;<br> iii. 4, 4, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_266> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 4, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ii. 1;<br> xviii. 1, etc.</ref> denoting the litter of grass strewn on the sacrificial ground on which the gods are summoned to seat themselves.

बलाका
<u>'''Balākā,'''</u> ‘crane,’ is mentioned in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_267> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 16, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 3, 14;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 22, 23. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 92.</ref>

बलाय
<u>'''Balāya'''</u> is the name of an unknown animal mentioned in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_268> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 38;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 19.</ref>

बलास
<u>'''Balāsa'''</u> is the name of a disease mentioned several times in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_269> iv. 9, 8;<br> v. 22, 11;<br> vi. 14;<br> 1;<br> 127, 1;<br> ix. 8, 8;<br> xix. 34, 10.</ref> and occasionally later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_269> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xii. 97.</ref> Mahīdhara<ref name=fx3_ve2_269> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> and Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx4_ve2_269> On Av. xix. 34, 10.</ref> interpret the term as ‘consumption.’ Zimmer<ref name=fx5_ve2_269> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 385-387.</ref> supports this view on the ground that it is mentioned<ref name=fx6_ve2_269> Av. ix. 8, 10.</ref> as a kind of '''[[यक्ष्म|Yakṣma]],''' makes the bones and joints fall apart (''asthi-sraṃsa, paruḥ-sraṃsa''),<ref name=fx7_ve2_269> Av. vi. 14, 1.</ref> and is caused by love, aversion, and the heart,<ref name=fx8_ve2_269> ix. 8, 8.</ref> characteristics which agree with the statements of the later Hindu medicine.<ref name=fx9_ve2_269> Wise, ''Hindu System of Medicine,'' 321, 322.</ref> It is in keeping with a demon of the character of consumption that [[बलास|Balāsa]] should appear as an accompaniment of [[तक्मन्|Takman]].<ref name=fx10_ve2_269> Av. iv. 9, 8;<br> xix. 34, 10.</ref> Grohmann,<ref name=fx11_ve2_269> ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 396 ''et seq.''</ref> however, thought  that a ‘sore’ or ‘swelling’ (in the case of fever caused by dropsy) was meant. Bloomfield<ref name=fx12_ve2_269> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 450.</ref> considers that the question is still open. Ludwig<ref name=fx13_ve2_269> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 510.</ref> renders the word by ‘dropsy.’<br><br>As remedies against the disease the salve ('''Āñjasa''') from '''[[त्रिककुद्|Trikakud]]'''<ref name=fx14_ve2_269> Av. iv. 9, 8.</ref> and the '''[[जङ्गिड|Jaṅgiḍa]]'''<ref name=fx15_ve2_269> Av. xix. 34, 10.</ref> plant are mentioned.

बलि
<u>'''Bali'''</u> occurs several times in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_270> To a god, Rv. i. 70, 9;<br> v. 1, 10;<br> viii. 100, 9;<br> to a king, in the compound ''bali-hṛt,'' ‘paying tribute,’ vii. 6, 5;<br> x. 173, 6.</ref> and often later<ref name=fx2_ve2_270> Metaphorically: Av. vi. 117, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 3, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxix. 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 5, 3, etc.;<br> ''bali-hṛt,'' Av. xi. 4, 19;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.;<br> bali-hāra,'' Av. xi. 1, 20;<br> literally: Av. iii. 4, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 18, 3;<br> iii. 12, 2, 7;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 2, 15;<br> 5, 3, 18;<br> 6, 3, 17;<br> xi 2, 6, 14;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xv. 7, 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 29 (''cf.'' vii. 34);<br> ''bali-hṛt,'' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxix. 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 2, 1.</ref> in the sense of tribute to a king or offering to a god. Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve2_270> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 166, 167.</ref> thinks that the offerings were in both cases voluntary. He compares the notices of the Germans in Tacitus,<ref name=fx4_ve2_270> ''Germania,'' 15.</ref> where the kings of the tribes are said to receive gifts in kind as presents, but not a regular tribute. There seems to be no ground whatever for this view. No doubt in origin the prerogatives of monarchy were due to voluntary action on the part of the tribesmen,<ref name=fx5_ve2_270> Later, too, benevolences (''praṇayākriyā'') were known. See Fleet, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 760762.</ref> but that the Vedic peoples, who were essentially a body of conquering invaders, were in this state is most improbable, and the attitude of the Vedic Indian to his gods was at least as compatible with tribute as with voluntary gifts. Zimmer admits that in the case of hostile tribes<ref name=fx6_ve2_270> See Rv. vii. 6, 5;<br> 18, 19.</ref> tribute must be meant even in the Rigveda. See also '''[[राजन्|Rājan]].'''

बल्कस
<u>'''Balkasa'''</u> denotes impure matter given off in the process of fermentation in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_271> xii. 8, 1, 16;<br> 9, 1, 2.</ref> The exact sense  may be either ‘scum,’ ‘sediment,’<ref name=fx2_ve2_271> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v., Flocken'' (‘flakes’).</ref> or perhaps more probably vegetable matter in the form of ‘husks.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_271> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 236, n. 1.</ref>

बल्बज
<u>'''Balbaja'''</u> is the name of the grass called ''Eleusine indica.'' It is mentioned in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_272> xiv. 2, 22. 23.</ref> and is said in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx2_ve2_272> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 8, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, x. 10;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 5.</ref> to be produced from the excrements of cattle. In the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve2_272/> it is stated to be used for the sacrificial litter ('''[[बर्हिस्|Barhis]]''') and for fuel. Baskets or other products made from this grass are referred to in a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’) in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx3_ve2_272> viii. 55. 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 69, 70.</ref>

बल्हिक
<u>'''1. Balhika'''</u> is the name of a people in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_273> v. 22, 5. 7. 9.</ref> where the fever ('''[[तक्मन्|Takman]]''') is called upon to go to the '''Mūjavants,''' the '''Mahāvṛṣas,''' and the Balhikas. The Mūjavants are quite certainly a northern tribe, and though, as Bloomfield<ref name=fx2_ve2_273> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 446.</ref> suggests, the passage may contain a pun on [[बल्हिक|Balhika]] as suggesting ‘outsider’ (from ''bahis,'' ‘without’), still no doubt the name was chosen from a northern tribe. But the view of Roth<ref name=fx3_ve2_273> ''Zur Litteratur und Geschichte des Weda,'' 41.</ref> and Weber,<ref name=fx4_ve2_273> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 205;<br> ''Proceedings of the Berlin Academy,'' 1892, 985-995.</ref> which Zimmer<ref name=fx5_ve2_273> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 130.</ref> once accepted, that an Iranian tribe is referred to (''cf.'' Balkh), is not at all probable. Zimmer<ref name=fx6_ve2_273> ''Op. cit.,'' 431-433.<br><br>''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 260;<br> Hopkins, ''Great Epic of India,'' 373.</ref> shows that there is no need whatever to assume Iranian influence. See also '''[[पर्शु|Parśu]].'''

बल्हिक प्रातिपीय
<u>'''2. Balhika Prātipīya'''</u> is the name of a '''Kuru''' king in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_274> xii. 9, 3, 3.</ref> where he appears as having been opposed to the restoration of '''[[दुष्टरीतु|Duṣṭarītu]] [[पौंसायन|Pauṃsāyana]]''' to his hereditary sovereignty over the '''Sṛñjayas,''' but as having failed to prevent  the restoration being carried out by '''[[रेवोत्तरस्|Revottaras]] [[पाटव|Pāṭava]] [[चाक्र|Cākra]] [[स्थपति|Sthapati]].''' The epithet [[प्रातिपीय|Prātipīya]] is curious: if it connects him with '''Pratīpa''' (whose son he is in the Epic), the form is remarkable, Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve2_274> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 432.</ref> indeed tacitly altering it to Prātīpīya. In the Epic and the Purāṇas<ref name=fx3_ve2_274> See Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 273 ''et seq.;<br>'' Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 131-136.</ref> he is in the form of Vāhlīka made a brother of '''Devāpi''' and '''Śantanu,''' and a son of Pratīpa. To base chronological conclusions on this<ref name=fx4_ve2_274> Pargiter, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1910, 52.</ref> would be utterly misleading, for the facts are that Devāpi was son of [[ऋष्टिषेण|Ṛṣṭiṣeṇa]] and a priest, while Śantanu was a Kuru prince of unknown parentage, but not probably a son of Pratīpa, who seems to be a late figure in the Vedic age, later than '''[[परिक्षित्|Parikṣit]],''' being his great-grandson in the Epic. Very possibly [[बल्हिक|Balhika]] was a descendant of Pratīpa. Why he bore the name [[बल्हिक|Balhika]] must remain uncertain, for there is no evidence of any sort regarding it.

बल्बूथ
<u>'''Balbūtha'''</u> is mentioned in one hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_275> viii. 46, 32.</ref> along with '''[[तरुक्ष|Tarukṣa]]''' and '''[[पृथुश्रवस्|Pṛthuśravas]],''' as a giver of gifts to the singer. He is called a '''[[दास|Dāsa]],''' but Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_275> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. [[दास|dāsa]].''</ref> was inclined to amend the text so as to say that the singer received a hundred Dāsas from [[बल्बूथ|Balbūtha]]. Zimmer's<ref name=fx3_ve2_275> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 117.</ref> suggestion that he may have been the son of an aboriginal mother, or perhaps an aboriginal himself, seems probable.<ref name=fx4_ve2_275> Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 30;<br> Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 196.</ref> If this was the case, it would be a clear piece of evidence for the establishment of friendly relations between the Āryans and the Dāsas.

बस्त
<u>'''1. Basta'''</u> denotes the ‘goat’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_276> i. 161, 13. The passage is unintelligible;<br> for a guess, see Tilak, ''Orion,'' 166 ''et seq.,'' and ''cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 145, n. 2.</ref> and the later literature.<ref name=fx2_ve2_276> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 7, 4;<br> v. 3, 1, 5;<br> 7, 10, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiv. 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 7, 7;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 4, 9 (Mādhyaṃdina = i. 4, 4 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]), etc., and ''cf.'' Av. viii. 6, 12;<br> xi. 9, 22.</ref> 

बस्त रामकायन
<u>'''2. Basta Rāmakāyana'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (iv. 2, 10). The patronymic is variously read Samakāyana.<br>==Foot Notes==

बहु-वचन
<u>'''Bahu-vacana'''</u> denotes in grammatical terminology the ‘plural’ in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_278> xiii. 5, 1, 18.</ref> and the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_278> v. 23;<br> xi. 16;<br> xii. 7 (which recognises the plural ''majestatis'').</ref> So ''dvivat, bahuvat,'' in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_278> ii. 24. 27;<br> xi. 16.</ref> means ‘in the dual and the plural.’

बह्व्-ऋच
<u>'''Bahv-ṛca'''</u> denotes an adherent of the Rigveda. The term is found in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_279> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 36;<br> v. 2;<br> vi. 18;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 11;<br> xvi. 9.</ref> of the Rigveda, in the Śatapatha<ref name=fx2_ve2_279> x. 5, 2, 20;<br> xi. 5, 1, 10.</ref> and the Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx3_ve2_279> v. 6, 6.</ref> and in the Āraṇyakas of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx4_ve2_279> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 3;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, viii. 4.</ref>

बाकुर
<u>'''Bākura'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda (ix. 1, 8) is used as an epithet of '''[[दृति|Dṛti]],''' the combined words denoting a wind instrument of some kind. ''Cf.'' '''[[बकुर|Bakura]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

बाडेयी-पुत्र
<u>'''Bāḍeyī-putra'''</u> (‘son of Bāḍeyī’) is mentioned in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 4, 30) as a pupil of '''[[मौषिकीपुत्र|Mauṣikīputra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

बाण
<u>'''Bāṇa'''</u> denotes ‘arrow’ in the Rigveda (vi. 75, 17) and later (Av. iii. 23, 2; vi. 105, 2, etc.).<br>==Foot Notes==

बाणवन्त्
<u>'''Bāṇavant'''</u> in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iii. 8, 2) denotes an ‘arrow’ like '''[[बाण|Bāṇa]].''' Its more normal sense is ‘quiver’ (lit., ‘containing arrows’), which is its sense in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā (xvi. 10) and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (v. 3, 1, 11). <br>==Foot Notes==

बादरायण
<u>'''Bādarāyaṇa'''</u> (‘descendant of Badara’) is the name of a teacher in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) at the end of the Sāmavidhāna [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_284> ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 377. Bādari is found in the Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 3, 18;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 34, n.</ref>

बाध्योग
<u>'''Bādhyoga'''</u> (‘descendant of Badhyoga’) is the patronymic of '''Jihvāvant,''' a pupil of '''[[असित|Asita]] [[वार्षगण|Vārṣagaṇa]],''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 4, 33).<br>==Foot Notes==

बाध्व
<u>'''Bādhva'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka (iii. 2, 3). The reading in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka (viii. 3) is '''[[वात्स्य|Vātsya]].'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_286> See Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 249, n. 1.</ref>

बाभ्रव
<u>'''Bābhrava,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[बभ्रु|Babhru]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''Vatsanapāt''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_287> ii. 5, 22;<br> iv. 5, 28 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> In the legend of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]]'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_287> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 17. The [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] version omits the words.</ref> the '''Kāpileyas''' and the Bābhravas are enumerated as the descendants of [[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]] under his adoptive name of '''[[देवरात|Devarāta]] [[वैश्वामित्र|Vaiśvāmitra]].''' A Sāman, or Chant, of [[बभ्रु|Babhru]] is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_287> xv. 3, 12.</ref>

बाभ्रव्य
<u>'''Bābhravya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[बभ्रु|Babhru]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''Girija''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 1), and of '''[[शङ्ख|Śaṅkha]]''' in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 41, 1; iv. 17, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

बार्हत्-सामा
<u>'''Bārhat-sāmā'''</u> is an anomalously formed word meaning ‘daughter of Bṛhatsāman’ in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_289> v. 25, 9. ''Cf'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 267.</ref> where her name occurs in a hymn for easy conception. 

बार्हस्-पत्य
<u>'''Bārhas-patya,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[बृहस्पति|Bṛhaspati]],’ is the patronymic of the mythical '''[[शंयु|Śaṃyu]].'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_290> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 10, 1;<br> v. 2, 6, 4;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 9, 1, 24;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iv. 21, etc.</ref>

बाल
<u>'''Bāla'''</u> denotes ‘boy,’ ‘young child,’ in the Upaniṣads.<ref name=fx1_ve2_291> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 1, 11;<br> 24, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 6.</ref> The later definition<ref name=fx2_ve2_291> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> makes childhood extend to the sixteenth year.

बालन्दन
<u>'''Bālandana'''</u> is a variant of '''[[भालन्दन|Bhālandana]],''' the patronymic of '''Vatsaprī.'''<br><br>^1 See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 459, 478.<br>==Foot Notes==

बालाकि
<u>'''Bālāki, Bālākyā.'''</u> See '''Dṛpta-[[बालाकि|bālāki]]''' and '''Kāśyapī-bālākyāmāṭharī-[[पुत्र|putra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

बालेय
<u>'''Bāleya'''</u> is a patronymic (‘descendant of Bali’) of '''Gandharvāyaṇa''' in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xx. 25).<br>==Foot Notes==

बाष्कल
<u>'''Bāṣkala.'''</u> See '''[[वार्कलि|Vārkali]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

बाष्किह
<u>'''Bāṣkiha,'''</u> ‘descendant of Baṣkiha,’ is the patronymic of '''[[शुनस्कर्ण|Śunaskarṇa]]''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_296> xvii. 12, 6.</ref> In the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_296> xxi. 17. See Caland, ''Über das rituelle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 28.</ref> he is a descendant of '''[[शिबि|Śibi]].'''

बाहीक
<u>'''Bāhīka'''</u> is applied in the Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_297> i. 7, 3, 8.</ref> to the people of the west, of the Panjab,<ref name=fx2_ve2_297> ''Cf.'' Mahābhārata, viii. 2030 ''et seq.,'' where the Bāhīkas are defined as the people of the Panjab and the Indus. This coincides exactly with what seems to be meant by the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], which regards as the middle the land to the east of the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]].'''<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 189;<br> 2, 37;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 201, n 2.</ref> as opposed to the '''Prācyas''' or easterns. They are said to have called Agni by the name of Bhava. 

बाहु
<u>'''Bāhu,'''</u> ‘arm,’ as a measure of length, is found in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (vi. 2, 11, 1) and often in the Sūtras.<br>==Foot Notes==

बाहु-वृक्त
<u>'''Bāhu-vṛkta'''</u> is the name of a man, apparently a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]], who overcame foes in battle, according to the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_299> v. 44, 12. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 138, 139. The Anukramaṇī (Index) attributes to him two hymns of the Rigveda, v. 71 and 72.</ref>

बिदल-कारी
<u>'''Bidala-kārī,'''</u> ‘female splitter of bamboos,’ is the name of one of the victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_300> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 8;<br> ''bidalakāra,'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 5, 1.</ref> Eggeling<ref name=fx2_ve2_300> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 414.</ref> renders the word as ‘basket-maker.’

बिम्ब
<u>'''Bimba'''</u> appears in one passage of the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 5, 6) to denote the plant ''Momordica monadelpha.''<br>==Foot Notes==

बिल्व
<u>'''Bilva'''</u> is the name of the wood-apple tree (''Aigle marmelos''). It is mentioned in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_302> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 4, 8, etc. ''Cf.'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 9, 3.</ref> and in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_302> xx. 136, 13.</ref> where a reference to its valuable fruit may be intended. According to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx3_ve2_302> ii. 1, 8, 1. 2. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 3, 20 (''paridhayaḥ'');<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> the sacrificial post was made of [[बिल्व|Bilva]] wood in some cases. The [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx4_ve2_302> xii. 20 ''et seq.''</ref> contains a hymn in praise of the virtues of an amulet of [[बिल्व|Bilva]] (''irā-[[मणि|maṇi]] bailva'').<ref name=fx5_ve2_302> At the present day the tree is called Bel, and its leaves are used in the ritual of Siva worship.</ref>

बिस
<u>'''Bisa'''</u> denotes the radical fibres of the lotus, which seem to have been eaten as a delicacy as early as the times of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_303> iv. 34, 5.</ref> It is mentioned also in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_303> v. 30.</ref> and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx3_ve2_303> iii. 2, 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xi. 4. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 70.</ref> 

बीज
<u>'''Bīja'''</u> denotes ‘seed,’ the operation of sowing seed (''vap'') being several times referred to in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_304> x. 94, 13;<br> 101, 3. ''Cf.'' metaphorically, x. 85, 37. In v. 53, 13, ''[[धान्य|dhānya]] [[बीज|bīja]]'' means the ‘seed which produces corn.’</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_304> Av. x. 6, 33;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 2, 2, 4, etc.</ref> In a metaphorical sense the term is used in the Upaniṣads of the classes of beings according to origin, of which the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_304> vi. 3, 1.</ref> enumerates three, the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_304> iii. 3. See Keith. ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 235.</ref> four. The former list includes ''aṇḍa-ja,'' ‘egg-born,’ ''[[जीव-ज|jīva-ja]],'' ‘born alive,’ and ''udbhij-ja,'' ‘produced from sprouts,’ ‘germinating,’ while the latter adds ''[[स्वेद-ज|sveda-ja]],'' ‘sweat-born’--that is, ‘generated by hot moisture,’ an expression which is glossed to comprise flies, worms, etc. ''Cf.'' '''[[कृषि|Kṛṣi]].'''

बुडिल आश्वतराश्वि
<u>'''Buḍila Āśvatarāśvi'''</u> or '''Āśvatara Āśvi''' is mentioned several times in the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] literature as a teacher. According to the Chāndogya<ref name=fx1_ve2_305> v. 11, 1;<br> 16, 1.</ref> and the Bṛhadāraṇyaka<ref name=fx2_ve2_305> v. 15, 11 (Mādhyaṃdina = v. 14, 8 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> Upaniṣads, he was a contemporary of '''[[जनक|Janaka]]''' of '''[[विदेह|Videha]],''' and, according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_305> x. 6, 1, 1. ''Cf.'' iv. 6, 1, 9. vi. 30.</ref> of '''[[अश्वपति|Aśvapati]],''' the '''[[केकय|Kekaya]]''' king. He is also mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].^4

बुध सौमायन
<u>'''Budha Saumāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Soma,'''’ is the name of a teacher mentioned in a verse in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_306> xxiv. 18, 6. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 55, n. 2.</ref>

बुन्द
<u>'''Bunda'''</u> means ‘arrow’ in a few passages of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_307> viii. 45, 4;<br> 77, 6. 11. ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 32.</ref>

बृबु
<u>'''Bṛbu'''</u> is mentioned in a hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_308> vi. 45, 31. 33.</ref> where he is described as a most generous giver (''sahasra-dātama''), and as at the head of the '''Paṇis.''' According to the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_308> xvi. 11, 11.</ref> '''[[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]]''' received gifts from [[बृबु|Bṛbu]] '''[[तक्षन्|Takṣan]]''' and  '''[[प्रस्तोक|Prastoka]] [[सार्ञ्जय|Sārñjaya]],''' a fact alluded to in the [[मानव|Mānava]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] Śāstra,<ref name=fx3_ve2_308> x. 107.</ref> where ''[[तक्षन्|takṣan]]'' is treated as a descriptive attribute, ‘a carpenter.’ Apparently [[बृबु|Bṛbu]] was a [[पणि|Paṇi]], though the words of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_308/> might be taken to mean that he was one who had overthrown them entirely. If so, [[पणि|Paṇi]] must here certainly mean a merchant in a good sense, [[बृबु|Bṛbu]] being then a merchant prince.<ref name=fx4_ve2_308> ''Cf.'' Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 606, n.</ref> According to Weber,<ref name=fx5_ve2_308> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 28 ''et seq.;<br> Proceedings of the Berlin Academy,'' 1898, 563, n. 1;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 198. The Bāveru Jātaka, on which stress is laid in connexion with the Indian knowledge of Babylon, being of quite unknown date, has no cogency as evidence for any early period. ''Cf.'' Bühler, ''Indische Palœographie,'' 17-19;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 79 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indian Literature'' 3;<br> Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 201 ''et seq.''</ref> the name suggests connexion with Babylon, but this conjecture must be regarded as quite improbable. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx6_ve2_308> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 93, 104, 107.</ref> sensibly expresses no opinion as to [[बृबु|Bṛbu]], while Brunnhofer's<ref name=fx7_ve2_308> ''Iran und Turan,'' 127.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 275;<br> Bṛhaddevatā, v. 108, 109, with Macdonell's notes;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 316.</ref> attempt to recognize a people named , and to connect them with the Vedic word ''[[तक्षन्|takṣan]],'' is valueless, especially considering the fact that [[तक्षन्|Takṣan]] is not found as an epithet of [[बृबु|Bṛbu]] in the Rigveda.

बृसय
<u>'''Bṛsaya'''</u> is mentioned twice in the Rigveda, being in the first passage<ref name=fx1_ve2_309> i. 93, 4.</ref> connected with the '''Paṇis,''' and in the second<ref name=fx2_ve2_309> vi. 61, 3.</ref> with the '''Pārāvatas''' and the Paṇis. According to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, the word is the name of a demon,<ref name=fx3_ve2_309> ''Cf.'' Sāyaṇa on Rv., ''loc., cit.''</ref> but is in the second passage<ref name=fx2_ve2_309/> used as an appellative, perhaps meaning ‘sorcerer.’<ref name=fx4_ve2_309> Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' following Grassmann.</ref> Hillebrandt<ref name=fx5_ve2_309> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 97-104.</ref> thinks that a people is meant locating them in Arachosia or Drangiana with the Pārāvatas and the Paṇis, and comparing , satrap of Arachosia and Drangiana in the time of Darius.<ref name=fx6_ve2_309> Arrian, ''Indica,'' viii. 4;<br> xxi. 1;<br> xxv. 8.</ref> But this theory is not probable. 

बृसी
<u>'''Bṛsī,'''</u> denoting a ‘cushion’ of grass, is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx1_ve2_310> i. 2, 4;<br> v. 1, 3, with Keith's note;<br> 3, 2.</ref> and the Sūtras.<ref name=fx2_ve2_310> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvii. 4, 7;<br> 6, 6;<br> Kātyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 3, 1.</ref> The incorrect forms Vṛśī and Vṛṣī also occur occasionally.

बृहच्-छन्दस्
<u>'''Bṛhac-chandas'''</u> is found in one passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_311> iii. 12, 3.</ref> as an epithet of '''[[शाला|Śālā]],''' ‘house.’ It is apparently<ref name=fx2_ve2_311> ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 105.</ref> an error for ''bṛhad-[[छदिस्|chadis]],'' ‘broad-roofed,’ which in any case is the sense.<ref name=fx3_ve2_311> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 345.</ref>

बृहत्-सामन्
<u>'''Bṛhat-sāman'''</u> is mentioned in the Atharvaveda (v. 19, 2) as an '''[[आङ्गिरस|Āṅgirasa]]''' who was oppressed by Kṣatriyas. The latter are said to have been ruined in consequence. ''Cf.'' '''[[सृञ्जय|Sṛñjaya]]''' and '''[[बार्हत्सामा|Bārhatsāmā]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

बृहद्-उक्थ
<u>'''Bṛhad-uktha'''</u> is mentioned in an obscure hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_313> v. 19, 3, where Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' treats it as adjectival. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft.'' 42, 214;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 126.</ref> as a priest; in two hymns of the tenth Maṇḍala<ref name=fx2_ve2_313> x. 54, 6;<br> 56, 7.</ref> he is definitely a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]]. He is also mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_313> viii. 23.</ref> as having consecrated '''[[दुर्मुख|Durmukha]] [[पाञ्चाल|Pāñcāla]],''' and is called '''Vāmadeva's''' son in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_313> xiii. 2, 2, 14.</ref> In the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_313> xiv. 9, 37, 38.</ref> he appears as '''Vāmneya,''' ‘descendant of Vāmnī.’ Hopkins<ref name=fx6_ve2_313> ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 55, n. 2.</ref> suggestion that he may have been there thought of as Vāmadevya also is quite probable.<ref name=fx7_ve2_313> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 9, 27, is parallel with xiv. 9, 38.</ref>

बृहद्-गिरि
<u>'''Bṛhad-giri'''</u> is said in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 1, 4) to have been one of the three '''Yatis''' who survived the slaughter of them by Indra. A Sāman, or Chant, of his is mentioned in the same [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 4, 15-17). <br>==Foot Notes==

बृहद्-दिव
<u>'''Bṛhad-diva'''</u> appears in a hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_315> x. 120, 8. 9.</ref> as its author, calling himself an [[अथर्वन्|Atharvan]]. He is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_315> iv. 14.</ref> and is named in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx3_ve2_315> xv. 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 133;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 141.</ref> as a pupil of '''[[सुम्नयु|Sumnayu]].'''

बृहद्-रथ
<u>'''Bṛhad-ratha'''</u> is mentioned twice in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_316> i. 36, 18;<br> x. 49, 6. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 147, 148.</ref> in both cases beside '''[[नववास्त्व|Navavāstva]].''' The name may thus be an epithet of [[नववास्त्व|Navavāstva]].

बृहद्-वसु
<u>'''Bṛhad-vasu'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_317> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 374.</ref>

बृहस्पति
<u>'''Bṛhaspati,'''</u> ‘lord of prayer,’ is the name of a god in the Vedic texts. The view of Thibaut,<ref name=fx1_ve2_318> ''Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik.'' 6.</ref> that the name designates the planet Jupiter, is certainly not supported by good evidence. Oldenberg<ref name=fx2_ve2_318> ''Nachrichten der ko7niglichen Gesellschaft der Wessenschaften zu Go7ttingen,'' 1909, 568, n. 3;<br> Whitney, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, xciv, correcting Tilak, ''Orion,'' 101. See also Fleet, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1911, 514-518;<br> Keith, ''ibid.,'' 794-800.</ref> seems clearly right in rejecting it.

बृहस्पति-गुप्त शायस्थि
<u>'''Bṛhaspati-[[गुप्त|gupta]] Śāyasthi'''</u> is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_319> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref> as a pupil of '''[[भवत्रात शायस्थि|Bhavatrāta Śāyasthi]].'''

बृहस्पति-सव
<u>'''Bṛhaspati-sava'''</u> is the name of a sacrifice by which, according to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_320> ii. 7, 1, 2. ''Cf.'' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 7;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 11, 4;<br> xxv. 1, 1, 7.</ref> the priest who desired to become a '''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]]''' obtained that office. According to the Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_320> ix. 9. 5.</ref> it was the sacrifice to be performed by a priest after the '''[[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]],''' while the king performed the '''[[राजसूय|Rājasūya]].''' In  the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_320> v. 2, 1, 19.</ref> on the other hand, the [[बृहस्पतिसव|Bṛhaspatisava]] is identified with the [[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]]; but such identity is clearly not primitive.<ref name=fx4_ve2_320> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, xxiv, xxv;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 107, 108.</ref>

बेकनाट
<u>'''Bekanāṭa'''</u> occurs only once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_321> viii. 16, 10.</ref> when Indra is said to overcome all the Bekanāṭas and the Paṇis. The natural sense, therefore, seems to be ‘usurer,’ the explanation given by [[यास्क|Yāska]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_321> Nirūkta, vi. 26.</ref> The word has a foreign appearance, but its provenance can hardly be determined: it might just as well be aboriginal as Babylonian.<ref name=fx3_ve2_321> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 44.</ref> Hillebrandt<ref name=fx4_ve2_321> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 268, n. 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 259.</ref> thinks Brunnhofer is right in identifying [[बेकनाट|Bekanāṭa]] with Bikanir.

बेकुरा
<u>'''Bekurā'''</u> occurs in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_322> i. 3, 1;<br> vi. 7, 6;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 82.</ref> where it may mean ‘voice’ or ‘sound,’ the sense assigned to the word in the Naighaṇṭuka.<ref name=fx2_ve2_322> i. 11.</ref> It is, however, possibly, like '''[[बकुर|Bakura]],''' the name of a musical instrument. In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_322> iii. 4, 7, 1.</ref> and the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_322> xviii. 14.</ref> Saṃhitās the words Bekuri and Vekuri occur as epithets of Apsarases, or celestial nymphs, meaning, perhaps, ‘melodious’; in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx5_ve2_322> xviii. 42.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx6_ve2_322> ix. 4, 1, 9.</ref> the variations Bhakuri and [[भाकुरि|Bhākuri]] are found.

बैज-वाप
<u>'''Baija-vāpa,'''</u> ‘descendant of Bījavāpa,’ is the name of a teacher in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) in the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (ii. 5, 20; iv. 5, 26).<br>==Foot Notes==

बैज-वापायन
<u>'''Baija-vāpāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[बैजवाप|Baijavāpa]],'''’ is the name of a teacher in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) in the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (ii. 5, 20; iv. 5, 26). The name is also spelt Vaijavāpāyana. <br>==Foot Notes==

बैज-वापि
<u>'''Baija-vāpi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Bījavāpa, or Bījavāpin,’ is the name of a teacher in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (i. 4, 7).<br>==Foot Notes==

बैन्द
<u>'''Bainda'''</u> is the name of one of the victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_326> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 16;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 12, 1.</ref> According to the commentator Mahīdhara, the word denotes a [[निषाद|Niṣāda]], but according to Sāyaṇa a catcher of fish. See '''[[मृगयु|Mṛgayu]].'''

बोध
<u>'''Bodha'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in the [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] Pāṭha.<ref name=fx1_ve2_327> ii. 16, 14. ''Cf.'' Winternitz, ''Mantrapāṭha,'' xiv.</ref> He is mentioned with '''Pratibodha''' in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_327> v. 30, 10;<br> viii. 1, 13.</ref> but Whitney<ref name=fx3_ve2_327> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 474.</ref> thinks that in the second passage, at least, the word is an ordinary noun meaning ‘the wakeful one.’

बौधायन
<u>'''Baudhāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Budha''' or '''[[बोध|Bodha]],'''’ is the name of a teacher who is mentioned in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_328> iv. 11, etc.</ref> and under whose name are current a Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] described<ref name=fx2_ve2_328> ''Über das rituelle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 1903.</ref> and in part edited by Caland,<ref name=fx3_ve2_328> ''Bibliotheca Indica,'' 1904, etc.</ref> and a [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] which has been edited<ref name=fx4_ve2_328> By Hultzsch, Leipzig, 1884.</ref> and translated,<ref name=fx5_ve2_328> Bühler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 14. See his Introduction, xxix ''et seq.,'' where, however, he tends to overestimate considerably the age of [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]].</ref> while the [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] is still unedited.

बौधी-पुत्र
<u>'''Baudhī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of '''[[बोध|Bodha]],'''’ is the name of a pupil of '''[[शालङ्कायनीपुत्र|Śālaṅkāyanīputra]]''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāranyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 4, 31).<br>==Foot Notes==

ब्रह्म-चर्य
<u>'''Brahma-carya'''</u> denotes the condition of life of the '''Brahmacārin'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_330> Rv. x. 109, 5;<br> Av. vi. 108, 2;<br> 133, 3;<br> xi. 5, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 3, 3, 1, etc.</ref> or religious student. The technical sense is first found in  the last Maṇḍala of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_330> Rv., ''loc. cit.''</ref> The practice of studentship doubtless developed, and was more strictly regulated by custom as time went on, but it is regularly assumed and discussed in the later Vedic literature, being obviously a necessary part of Vedic society<br><br>The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_330> xi. 5. ''Cf.'' Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 1-8, which contains an independent account of the Brahmacārin (Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 110);<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 3, 3, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 3, 10, 5.</ref> has in honour of the Brahmacārin a hymn which already gives all the characteristic features of religious studentship. The youth is initiated (''upa-nī'') by the teacher<ref name=fx4_ve2_330> Av. xi. 5, 3. It is used in the ritual of the Upanayana, according to the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], lv. 18.</ref> into a new life; he wears an antelope skin, and lets his hair grow long;<ref name=fx5_ve2_330> Av. xi. 5, 6.</ref> he collects fuel,<ref name=fx6_ve2_330> Av. xi. 5, 4, 6.</ref> and begs,<ref name=fx7_ve2_330> Av. xi. 5, 9.</ref> learns, and practises penance. All these characteristics appear in the later literature. The student lives in the house of his teacher (''ācārya-kula-vāsin;''<ref name=fx8_ve2_330> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 23, 2. So regularly ''brahma-caryeṇa vas,'' Av. vii. 109, 7;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 14, etc.;<br> or ''car,'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 3, 3, 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7, 6, 3, etc.</ref> ''[[अन्ते-वासिन्|ante-vāsin]]'');<ref name=fx9_ve2_330> ''Ibid.,'' iii. 11, 5;<br> iv. 10, 1;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 3, 15 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 3, 7 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 3, 3;<br> 11. 1.</ref> he begs,<ref name=fx10_ve2_330> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 3, 5. ''Cf.'' Av. vi. 133, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 3, 3, 5.</ref> looks after the sacrificial fires,<ref name=fx11_ve2_330> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 10, 2 ''et seq.;<br>'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. xi. 3, 3, 4.</ref> and tends the house.<ref name=fx12_ve2_330> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 6, 2, 15. A [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] in the Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 22, 1. 2, and elsewhere, sums up the duties of the Brahmacārin as ‘thou art a Brahmacārin: eat water;<br> perform thy duty;<br> sleep not in the daytime;<br> obedient to thy teacher study the Veda (''brahmacāry asy;<br> apo ‘śāna;<br> karma kuru;<br> divā mā svāpsīr;<br> ācāryāyādhīno vedam adhīṣva'').’ One duty specially referred to in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 1, 6;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, vii. 19, and the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 5, 5, was the guarding of the teacher's cattle when they were grazing on their pasture grounds. From these grounds, too, the pupil would, no doubt, bring dried dung for fuel, as well as any available sticks. As regards obedience to the teacher, ''cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 3, 3, 6.</ref> His term of studentship might be long extended: it was normally fixed at twelve years,<ref name=fx13_ve2_330> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 10;<br> vi. 1, 2.</ref> but much longer periods, such as thirty-two years, are mentioned.<ref name=fx14_ve2_330> ''Ibid.,'' viii. 7, 3 (thirty-two years);<br> 15 (for life), etc.</ref> The  age at which studentship began varied.<ref name=fx15_ve2_330> See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 21. The Sūtras allowed for a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] the ages 8-16;<br> for a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]], 11-22;<br> for a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]], 12-24. The difference between the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] and the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]], compared with that between the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] and the [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]], shows that the two latter castes were in a different position from the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].</ref> '''[[श्वेतकेतु|Śvetaketu]]''' commenced at twelve and studied for twelve years.<ref name=fx16_ve2_330> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 2.</ref><br><br>It is assumed in the [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] Sūtras that the three Āryan castes were all required to pass through a period of studentship. But that this is much more than priestly schematism is uncertain. No doubt individuals of the '''[[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]''' or '''[[वैश्य|Vaiśya]]''' caste might go through part of the period of studentship, just as Burmese boys of all classes now pass some time in a monastery as students. This is borne out by the reference in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx17_ve2_330> xv. 5, 17. ''Cf.'' Lanman in Whitney's Translation of the Atharvaveda, 639.</ref> to the king guarding his country by [[ब्रह्मचर्य|Brahmacarya]]--though that is susceptible of a different interpretation--and more clearly by the reference in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx18_ve2_330> ix. 16 (reading ''abrāhmaṇa'') .</ref> to a rite intended to benefit one who, although not a Brahmin, had studied (''vidyām anūcya''), but had not gained renown, and by references in the Upaniṣads to kings who like '''[[जनक|Janaka]]''' studied the Vedas and the Upaniṣads.<ref name=fx19_ve2_330> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 2, 1.</ref> Normally, however, the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] studied the art of war.<ref name=fx20_ve2_330> ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 106-113.</ref><br><br>One of the duties of the Brahmacārin was chastity. But reference is in several places<ref name=fx21_ve2_330> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, x. 65;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 10, 9.</ref> made to the possibility of misconduct between a student and the wife of his preceptor, nor is any very severe penance imposed in early times--later it is different--for such a sin. In certain cases the ritual required a breach of chastity, no doubt as a magic spell to secure fertility.<ref name=fx22_ve2_330> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 9, 4;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 125, n. 1;<br> Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 79.</ref><br><br>Even an old man might on occasion become a pupil, as the story of '''[[आरुणि|Āruṇi]]''' shows.<ref name=fx23_ve2_330> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 6 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 2, 4 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).<br><br>''Cf.'' von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 202, 203;<br> Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 151;<br> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 10, 121 ''et seq.;<br>'' Deussen, ''Philosophy of the Upanishads,'' 370, 371, and see '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].'''</ref> 

ब्रह्म-ज्य
<u>'''Brahma-jya,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_331> v. 19, 7. 12;<br> xii. 5, 15 ''et seq.;<br>'' xiii. 3, 1. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7, 9, 2.</ref> ‘oppressor of a Brahmin,’ and '''Brahma-jyeya,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_331> Av. xii. 4, 11.</ref> ‘oppression of a Brahmin,’ are terms mentioned several times in the Atharvaveda as expressing a heinous crime which involves its perpetrator in ruin. See '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].'''

ब्रह्म-दत्त चैकितानेय
<u>'''Brahma-datta Caikitāneya'''</u> (‘descendant of Cekitāna’) is the name of a teacher in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (i. 3, 26). He is mentioned also in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (i. 38, 1; 59, 1) as patronized by '''Abhipratārin,''' the Kuru king.<br>==Foot Notes==

ब्रह्मन्
<u>'''1. Brahman'''</u> (neut.) denotes the priestly class as opposed to the warrior class and the people ('''[[क्षत्र|Kṣatra]]''' and '''[[विश्|Viś]]'''). The term is found in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_333> ii. 15, 4;<br> ix. 7, 9;<br> xii. 5, 8;<br> xv. 10, 3, 4.</ref> and repeatedly later on.<ref name=fx2_ve2_333> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 3, 1, 1, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vi. 3;<br> vii. 21, etc. See also '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]]''' and '''[[क्षत्र|Kṣatra]].'''</ref> For the position, etc., of this class, see '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].'''

ब्रह्मन्
<u>'''2. Brahman'''</u> is found in many passages of the Rigveda and later in the sense of ‘priest.’ In many passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_334> i. 80, 1;<br> 164, 34;<br> ii. 2, 6;<br> vi. 45, 7;<br> vii. 33, 11;<br> viii. 16, 7;<br> x. 71, 11;<br> 77, 1;<br> 85, 3, 16. 34;<br> 107, 6;<br> 117, 7;<br> 125, 5;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 244-246.</ref> he is referred to as praising the gods; in others<ref name=fx2_ve2_334> i. 10, 1;<br> 33, 9;<br> 101, 5;<br> 108, 7;<br> 158, 6;<br> ii. 39, 1;<br> iv. 50, 8, 9;<br> 58, 2;<br> v. 29, 3;<br> 31, 4;<br> 32, 12;<br> 40, 8;<br> vii. 7, 5;<br> 42, 1;<br> viii. 7, 20;<br> 17, 2;<br> 31, 1;<br> 32, 16;<br> 33 19;<br> 45, 39;<br> 64, 7;<br> 77, 5;<br> 92, 30;<br> 96, 5;<br> ix. 96, 6;<br> 112, 1;<br> 113, 6;<br> x. 28 11;<br> 71, 11;<br> 85, 29;<br> 141, 3;<br> Muir, ''op. cit.,'' 12, 246-251.</ref> the sense of ‘priest’ is adequate. In not a few cases<ref name=fx3_ve2_334> i. 108, 7;<br> iv. 50, 8, 9;<br> viii. 7, 20;<br> 45, 39;<br> 64, 7;<br> 92, 30;<br> ix. 112, 1;<br> x. 85, 29;<br> Muir, 12, 258.</ref> the priesthood as a profession is clearly alluded to, nor is there any reason to doubt<ref name=fx4_ve2_334> ''Loc. cit. Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 190 ''et seq.''</ref> that in all cases the word has the technical sense of a member of the priesthood. There is, however, considerable doubt as to the number of cases in the Rigveda, where it has the technical  sense of the priest who guides the sacrifice generally. It is undoubtedly found in that sense, both Muir<ref name=fx5_ve2_334> ''Op. cit.,'' 12, 251, citing ii. 1, 2 (= ix. 91, 10);<br> iv. 9, 4;<br> x. 52, 2.</ref> and Roth<ref name=fx6_ve2_334> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 2, citing ii. 1, 2;<br> ix. 96, 6;<br> x. 71, 11;<br> 107, 6. In none of the last three passages is the specific sense cogently required.</ref> recognizing instances of its being used thus. Geldner,<ref name=fx7_ve2_334> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 145 ''et seq.;<br>'' 3, 155. He thinks that the sense of ‘superintending priest’ is the older, and sees it in i. 158, 6;<br> iv. 9, 4;<br> 50, 7. 8;<br> vii. 7, 5;<br> 33, 11;<br> x. 141, 3, etc.</ref> however, is anxious to find that sense in a large number of passages, and insists that the '''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]]''' was normally a [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] in the narrower sense. Oldenberg,<ref name=fx8_ve2_334> ''Religion des Veda,'' 396, 397, who thinks that the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] priest known to the Rigveda was the '''[[ब्राह्मणाच्छंसिन्|Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin]]''' and who in most passages (''e.g.,'' iv. 50, 7. 8) sees only the sense of ‘priest.’ ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 376, 377.</ref> on the other hand, holds with greater probability that in most of the passages adduced [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] means simply ‘priest,’ and that the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], who was essentially not a member of the ordinary body of sacrificing priests ('''[[ऋत्व्इज्|Ṛtvij]]'''), was, when he officiated at the sacrifice, more usually the [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] priest, and only later became the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]]. This change he regards as having taken place when the importance of the hymns declined, and most weight was laid on the functions of the priest who superintended the sacrifice as a whole, and by his magic repaired the flaws in the sacrifice.<ref name=fx9_ve2_334> ''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Go7ttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen,'' 1894, 420;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Rituallitteratur,'' 13;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' lxviii;<br> ''Atharvaveda,'' 32;<br> and see '''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]].'''</ref> In the later literature both senses of the word are quite common.<ref name=fx10_ve2_334> As ‘priest,’ Av. ii. 7, 2;<br> iv. 35, 1. 2;<br> v. 8, 5;<br> 17, 8;<br> 18, 7;<br> 19, 8;<br> vi. 122, 5;<br> viii. 9, 3;<br> x. 1, 3;<br> 4, 30. 33;<br> 7, 24;<br> xi. 1, 25;<br> xii. 1, 38;<br> xix. 32, 8;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 7, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxvi. 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, etc. As ‘superintending priest,’ Av. xviii. 4, 15;<br> xx. 2, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 9, 1;<br> ii. 3, 11, 4;<br> iii. 5, 2, 1, etc.;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 17;<br> and see Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 34, 35;<br> 114;<br> 135-138;<br> 327;<br> 330-337.</ref>

ब्रह्म-पुत्र
<u>'''Brahma-putra'''</u> in a few passages is used in the sense of a ‘priest's son.’<br><br>^1 Rv. ii. 43, 2; Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 4, 1, 2. 9. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 43, 69; Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 252. <br>==Foot Notes==

ब्रह्म-पुरोहित
<u>'''Brahma-purohita'''</u> is found in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_336> xix. 10;<br> xxvii. 4.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_336> xii. 8, 3, 29.</ref> where the St. Petersburg Dictionary gives the sense as ‘having the priesthood as its [[पुरोहित|Purohita]].’ This seems rather doubtful; more probably the sense should be ‘having a [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] priest as [[पुरोहित|Purohita]],’ unless the word merely means ‘having the priesthood superior to it,’ as an epithet of '''[[क्षत्र|Kṣatra]],''' the ‘warrior caste,’ which seems to be Weber's view.<ref name=fx3_ve2_336> ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 30.</ref>

ब्रह्म-बन्धु
<u>'''Brahma-bandhu'''</u> (‘priest fellow’) denotes, in a deprecatory sense, an ‘unworthy priest,’ ‘priest in name only,’ in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_337> vii. 27.</ref> and the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_337> vi. 1, 1. ''Cf.'' Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 6, 28;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxii. 4, 22;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 29, 9;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 99, 100.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[राजन्यबन्धु|Rājanyabandhu]].'''

ब्रह्मर्षि-देश
<u>'''Brahmarṣi-deśa.'''</u> See '''[[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

ब्रह्म-वद्य
<u>'''Brahma-vadya.'''</u> See '''[[ब्रह्मोद्य|Brahmodya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

ब्रह्म-वादिन्
<u>'''Brahma-vādin'''</u> (‘expounder of the Veda’) in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_340> Av. xi. 3, 26;<br> xv. 1, 8;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 7, 1, 4;<br> ii. 6, 2, 3;<br> 3, 1;<br> v. 2, 7, 1;<br> 5, 3, 2;<br> vi. 1, 4, 5.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_340> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 10, 6;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 3, 13;<br> vi. 4, 15;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka. i. 22, 9;<br> v. 2, 2;<br> 4, 6;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 24, 1, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘theologian.’ Brahma-vid (‘knowing what is sacred’) has the same sense.<ref name=fx3_ve2_340> Av. x. 7, 24. 27;<br> 8, 43;<br> xix. 43, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 8, 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 7, 4;<br> iv. 4, 11, 12, etc.</ref>

ब्रह्म-विद्या
<u>'''Brahma-vidyā,'''</u> ‘knowledge of the Absolute,’ is the name of one of the sciences enumerated in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_341> vii. 1, 2, 4;<br> 2, 1;<br> 7, 1.</ref> It is also mentioned elsewhere.<ref name=fx2_ve2_341> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 4, 20, etc.</ref>

ब्रह्म-वृद्धि
<u>'''Brahma-vṛddhi'''</u> is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_342> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372, 382.</ref> as a pupil of '''Mitravarcas.''' 

ब्रह्म-हत्या
<u>'''Brahma-hatyā,'''</u> the ‘murder of a Brahmin,’ is mentioned in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_343> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 1, 2;<br> v. 3, 12, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxix. 13, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_343> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 1, 1;<br> 5, 3;<br> 5, 4, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, x. 38;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 27, etc.</ref> as a heinous crime. The murderer is called Brahma-han.<ref name=fx3_ve2_343> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 1, 2;<br> vi. 5, 10, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxi. 7;<br> Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitā, xlvii. 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 8, 12;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 5, 4, etc. ''Cf.'' '''[[धर्म|Dharma]].'''</ref>

ब्रह्मावर्त
<u>'''Brahmāvarta.'''</u> See '''[[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

ब्रह्मोद्य
<u>'''Brahmodya'''</u> in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_345> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 6, 9, 20;<br> xi. 4, 1, 2;<br> 5, 3, 1;<br> 6, 2, 5;<br> xiii. 2, 6, 9;<br> 5, 2, 11;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 8, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 25.</ref> denotes a ‘theological riddle,’ such as formed an essential part of various ceremonies in the Vedic ritual, as at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] or the Daśarātra. [[ब्रह्म-वद्य|Brahma-vadya]] is the form found in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_345> xxvii. 4.</ref> and Brahma-vādya in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve2_345> ii. 5, 8, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 172;<br> ''Religion of the Veda,'' 216 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 118, 119;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 390 ''et seq.;<br>'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 452, 453.</ref> probably has the same sense.

ब्रह्मोपनिषद्
<u>'''Brahmopaniṣad,'''</u> a ‘secret doctrine regarding the Absolute,’ is the name of a discussion in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iii. 11, 3).<br>==Foot Notes==

ब्रह्मौदन
<u>'''Brahmaudana'''</u> denotes in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_347> Av. iv. 35, 7;<br> xi. 1, 1, 3, 20. 23 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 8, 7;<br> v. 7, 3, 4;<br> vi. 5, 6, 1, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_347> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 1, 1, 1. 4;<br> 3, 6, 6;<br> 4, 1, 5, etc.</ref> the ‘rice boiled ('''[[ओदन|Odana]]''') for the priests’ officiating at the sacrifice.

ब्राह्मण
<u>'''1. Brāhmaṇa,'''</u> ‘descendant of a Brahman’ (''i.e.,'' of a priest), is found only a few times in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_348> i. 164, 45;<br> vi. 75, 10;<br> vii. 103, 1. 7. 8;<br> x. 16, 6;<br> 71, 8. 9;<br> 88, 19;<br> 90, 12;<br> 97, 22;<br> 109, 4. See Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 251-257;<br> Roth, ''[[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], Erläuterungen,'' 126;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' where Rv. viii. 58, 1, is added;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 220-226.</ref> and mostly in its latest  parts. In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_348> ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 1;<br> v. 17, 9;<br> 18, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' 19, 2 ''et seq.;<br>'' xi. 1, 28;<br> xix. 34, 6;<br> 35, 2, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx3_ve2_348> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 7, 2;<br> ii. 1, 2, 8, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vii. 46. etc.</ref> it is a very common word denoting ‘priest,’ and it appears in the quadruple division of the castes in the [[पुरुष|Puruṣa]]-[[सूक्त|sūkta]] (‘hymn of man’) of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx4_ve2_348> x. 90.</ref><br><br>It seems certain that in the Rigveda this [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], or Brahmin, is already a separate caste, differing from the warrior and agricultural castes.<ref name=fx5_ve2_348> ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 235;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 146, n. 1;<br> and see '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]].'''</ref> The texts regularly claim for them a superiority to the '''[[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]''' caste,<ref name=fx6_ve2_348> See Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 8;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxix. 10;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxi. 21;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 4, 15;<br> xiii. 1, 9, 1;<br> 3, 7, 8;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 15;<br> viii. 9;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 8, 2;<br> xi. 11;<br> 9;<br> xv. 6, 3;<br> and ''cf.'' '''[[ब्रह्मपुरोहित|Brahmapurohita]];<br>''' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 27 ''et seq.''</ref> and the Brahmin is able by his spells or manipulation of the rite to embroil the people and the warriors<ref name=fx7_ve2_348> See Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 7;<br> iii. 3, 10;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 11, 2, etc.</ref> or the different sections of the warriors.<ref name=fx8_ve2_348> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 3, 10.</ref> If it is necessary to recognize, as is sometimes done, that the Brahmin does pay homage to the king at the '''[[राजसूय|Rājasūya]],'''<ref name=fx9_ve2_348> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 4, 23 (Mādhyaṃdina = i. 4, 11 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]). ''Cf.'' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxviii. 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 3, 2;<br> v. 4, 2, 7. Contrast the claim that Soma alone is King of the Brahmins, Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 18;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 2, 3.</ref> nevertheless the unusual fact is carefully explained away so as to leave the priority of the Brahmin unaffected. But it is expressly recognized that the union of the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] and the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] is essential for complete prosperity.<ref name=fx10_ve2_348> See [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 10, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xix. 10;<br> xxvii. 4;<br> xxix. 10;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 3;<br> 7, 7;<br> iii. 1, 9;<br> 2, 3;<br> iv. 3, 9;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xx. 25;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xix. 17, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 4, 6;<br> v. 4, 4, 15;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 10. 17, 24, 25, etc. ''Cf.'' '''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]].'''</ref> It is admitted<ref name=fx11_ve2_348> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 8, 7;<br> Pañcavimśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xviii. 10, 8;<br> Av. v. 1719;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 2, 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 1, 5, 4.</ref> that the king or the nobles might at times oppress the Brahmins, but it is indicated that ruin is then certain swiftly to follow. <br><br>The Brahmins are gods on earth,<ref name=fx12_ve2_348> Av. v. 3, 2;<br> vi. 13, 1;<br> 44, 2;<br> xix. 62, 1 (compared with xix. 32, 8), and probably v. 11, 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 7, 3, 1;<br> ii. 5, 9, 6;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, viii. 13;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 4, 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 2, 6;<br> 4, 3, 14;<br> iii. 1, 1, 11;<br> iv. 3, 4, 4. See Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 10, 35, 36;<br> von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 146, 147.</ref> like the gods in heaven, but this claim is hardly found in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx13_ve2_348> Neither in i. 139, 7, nor ix. 99, 6 (see Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, (''s.v. deva''), is this sense at all probable. Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 206, quotes 1, 128, 8, but that also is uncertain.</ref><br><br>In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx14_ve2_348> vii. 29, 2. ''Cf.'' '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]].''' n. 71.</ref> the Brahmin is said to be the ‘recipient of gifts’ (''ādāyī'') and the ‘drinker of the offering’ (''āpāyī''). The other two epithets applied, ''āvasāyī'' and ''yathākāma-prayāpya,'' are more obscure; the former denotes either ‘dwelling everywhere’<ref name=fx15_ve2_348> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 326.</ref> or ‘seeking food’;<ref name=fx16_ve2_348> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 439.</ref> the latter is usually taken as ‘moving at pleasure,’ but it must rather allude to the power of the king to assign a place of residence to the Brahmin.<br><br>In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx17_ve2_348> xi. 5, 7, 1 ''et seq.'' See Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 10, 41 ''et seq.''</ref> the prerogatives of the Brahmin are summed up as (1) [[अर्चा|Arcā]], ‘honour’; (2) [[दान|Dāna]], ‘gifts’; (3) [[अज्येयता|Ajyeyatā]], ‘freedom from oppression’; and (4) [[अवध्यता|Avadhyatā]], ‘freedom from being killed.’ On the other hand, his duties are summed up as (5) Brāhmaṇya, ‘purity of descent’; (6) Pratirūpa-caryā, ‘devotion of the duties of his caste’; and (7) Loka-[[पक्ति|pakti]], ‘the perfecting of people’ (by teaching).<br><br>1. ''Respect paid to Brahmins.''--The texts are full<ref name=fx18_ve2_348> ''E.g.,'' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā;<br> xxv. 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 10, 6;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 1, 10;<br> 3, 4, 6, etc.</ref> of references to the civilities to be paid to the Brahmin. He is styled ''bhagavant,''<ref name=fx19_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 6, 1, 2.</ref> and is provided with good food<ref name=fx20_ve2_348> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xix. 12.</ref> and entertainment wherever he goes. Indeed, his sanctity exempts him from any close inquiry into his real claim to Brahminhood according to the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx21_ve2_348> vi. 5, 8;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxvii. 2.</ref><br><br>2. ''Gifts to Brahmins.''--The Dānastuti (‘Praise of gifts’) is a recognized feature of the Rigveda, and the greed of the poets for '''Dakṣiṇās,''' or sacrificial fees, is notorious. Vedic texts<ref name=fx22_ve2_348> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiv. 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 2, 6, 7.</ref> themselves recognize that the literature thence resulting ('''Nārā-  śaṃsī''') was often false to please the donors. It was, however, a rule<ref name=fx23_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 1, 25. ''Cf.'' also Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 15, 8;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 3, 14, etc.</ref> that Brahmins should not accept what had been refused by others; this indicates a keen sense of the danger of cheapening their wares. So exclusively theirs was the right to receive gifts that the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx24_ve2_348> xiii. 7, 12.</ref> has to explain how '''[[तरन्त|Taranta]]''' and '''[[पुरुमीळ्ह|Purumīḷha]]''' became able to accept gifts by composing a Rigvedic hymn.<ref name=fx25_ve2_348> ix. 58, 3.</ref> The exaggerations in the celebration of the gifts bestowed on the priests has the curious result of giving us a series of numerals of some interest ('''[[दशन्|Daśan]]'''). In some passages<ref name=fx26_ve2_348> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 12, 1. 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 6, etc.</ref> certain gifts--those of a horse or sheep--are forbidden, but this rule was not, it is clear, generally observed.<br><br>3. ''Immunities of Brahmins.''--The Brahmin claimed to be exempt from the ordinary exercise of the royal power. When a king gives all his land and what is on it to the priests, the gift does not cover the property of the Brahmin according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx27_ve2_348> xiii. 5, 4, 29;<br> 6, 2, 18;<br> 7, 1, 13.</ref> The king censures all, but not the Brahmin,<ref name=fx28_ve2_348> ''Ibid.,'' v. 4, 2, 3.</ref> nor can he safely oppress any Brahmin other than an ignorant priest.<ref name=fx29_ve2_348> ''Ibid.,'' xiii. 4, 2, 17.</ref> An arbitrator (or a witness) must decide (or speak) for a Brahmin against a non-Brahmin in a legal dispute.<ref name=fx30_ve2_348> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 11, 9.</ref><br><br>The Brahmin's proper food is the '''Soma,'''<ref name=fx31_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 7, 2, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 29. ''Cf.'' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ix. 40;<br> x. 18, etc.</ref> not '''[[सुरा|Surā]]'''<ref name=fx32_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 8, 1,--5.</ref> or '''[[परिस्रुत्|Parisrut]],'''<ref name=fx33_ve2_348> ''Ibid.,'' xii. 9, 1, 1.</ref> and he is forbidden to eat certain forms of flesh.<ref name=fx34_ve2_348> ''Ibid.,'' 1, 2, 3, 9;<br> vii. 5, 2, 37;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 8.</ref> On the other hand, he alone is allowed to eat the remains of the sacrifice,<ref name=fx35_ve2_348> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 3, 1, 39;<br> 5, 3, 16, etc. On the food of the Brahmins, ''cf.'' also [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], x. 4, 5;<br> xvii. 1, 9;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 11.</ref> for no one else is sufficiently holy to consume food which the gods have eaten. Moreover, though he cannot be a physician,<ref name=fx36_ve2_348> ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 5, 8-14, where the Aśvins, who are famous as physicians (viii. 2, 1, 3;<br> xii. 7, 1, 11). are treated as impure.</ref> he helps the physician by being beside him  while he exercises his art.<ref name=fx37_ve2_348> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 4, 9, 3. Contrast Rv. x. 97, 22, where no discredit attaches to the profession.</ref> His wife<ref name=fx38_ve2_348> Av. v. 17.</ref> and his cow<ref name=fx39_ve2_348> ''Ibid.,'' v. 18.</ref> are both sacred.<br><br>4. ''Legal Position of Brahmins.''--The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx40_ve2_348> ii. 6, 10. 2.</ref> lays down a penalty of a hundred (the unit meant is unknown) for an insult to a Brahmin, and of a thousand for a blow; but if his blood is drawn, the penalty is a spiritual one. The only real murder is the slaying of a Brahmin according to the Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx41_ve2_348> xiii. 3, 5, 3.</ref> The crime of slaying a Brahmin ranks above the sin of killing any other man, but below that of killing an embryo (''bhrūṇa'') in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]];<ref name=fx42_ve2_348> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxi. 7;<br> Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitā, xlvii. 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 8, 12.</ref> the crime of slaying an embryo whose sex is uncertain is on a level with that of slaying a Brahmin.<ref name=fx43_ve2_348> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 10, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxvii. 9;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 481;<br> 10, 66.</ref> The murder of a Brahmin can be expiated only by the horse sacrifice,<ref name=fx44_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 1, 1;<br> 5, 4, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> or by a lesser rite in the late [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx45_ve2_348> x. 38.</ref> The ritual slaying of a Brahmin is allowed in the later ceremonial,<ref name=fx46_ve2_348> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 10, 10;<br> 12, 16-20;<br> Weber, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 18, 268, 269.</ref> and hinted at in the curious legend of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]];'''<ref name=fx47_ve2_348> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 15;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 20.</ref> and a [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] might be punished with death for treachery to his master.<ref name=fx48_ve2_348> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 6, 8.</ref><br><br>5. ''Purity of Birth.''--The importance of pure descent is seen in the stress laid on being a descendant of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] (''ārṣeya'').<ref name=fx49_ve2_348> See [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 6, 1, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vii. 46;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 4, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 3, 4, 19;<br> xii. 4, 4, 6.</ref> But, on the other hand, there are clear traces of another doctrine, which requires learning, and not physical descent, as the true criterion of Ṛṣihood.<ref name=fx50_ve2_348> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 6, 1, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxx. 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 8, 1.</ref> In agreement with this is the fact that '''[[सत्यकाम|Satyakāma]] [[जाबाल|Jābāla]]''' was received as a pupil, though his parentage was unknown, his mother being a slave girl who had been connected with several men,<ref name=fx51_ve2_348> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 4.</ref> and that in the Śatapatha  [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx52_ve2_348> xi. 5, 4, 1;<br> and ''cf.'' a citation in the scholiast on Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 6, 14;<br> ‘Whoever studies the Stomabhāgas (a peculiarity of the Vasiṣṭhas) is a Vasiṣṭha’;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 73.</ref> the ceremony on acceptance as a pupil required merely the name of the pupil. So '''[[कवष|Kavaṣa]]''' is taunted in the Rigveda Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx53_ve2_348> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 19;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 3;<br> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 311.</ref> as being the son of a female slave ('''Dāsī'''), and '''[[वत्स|Vatsa]]''' cleared himself of a similar imputation by a fire ordeal.<ref name=fx54_ve2_348> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 6, 6.</ref> Moreover, a very simple rite was adequate to remove doubts as to origin.<ref name=fx55_ve2_348> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 6, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxv. 3;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxiii. 4, 2.</ref> In these circumstances it is doubtful whether much value attaches to the '''[[प्रवर|Pravara]]''' lists in which the ancestors of the priest were invoked at the beginning of the sacrifice by the [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] and the [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]] priests.<ref name=fx56_ve2_348> See Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 9, 321;<br> 10, 8. 81;<br> Max Müller. ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 380 ''et seq.''</ref> Still, in many parts of the ritual the knowledge of two or more generations was needed,<ref name=fx57_ve2_348> ''Cf., e.g.,'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 5, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiii. 5.</ref> and in one ceremony<ref name=fx58_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 5, 4;<br> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 10, 85-88.</ref> ten ancestors who have drunk the Soma are required, but a literal performance of the rite is excused. Moreover, there are clear traces of ritual variations in schools, like those of the '''Vasiṣṭhas''' and the '''Viśvāmitras.'''<br><br>6. ''The Conduct of the Brahmin.''--The Brahmin was required to maintain a fair standard of excellence.<ref name=fx59_ve2_348> Weber, 10, 88-96;<br> Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 407 ''et seq.''</ref> He was to be kind to all<ref name=fx60_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. ii. 3, 2, 12.</ref> and gentle,<ref name=fx61_ve2_348> ''Ibid.,'' ii. 3, 4, 6.</ref> offering sacrifice and receiving gifts.<ref name=fx62_ve2_348> ''Ibid.,'' xiii. 1, 5, 6.</ref> Especial stress was laid on purity of speech;<ref name=fx63_ve2_348> ''Ibid.,'' iii. 2, 1, 24. ''Cf.'' iv. 1, 3, 17;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], xiii. 9;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiv. 5;<br> xxxvii. 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 62.</ref> thus '''Viśvantara's''' excuse for excluding the '''Śyāparṇas''' from his retinue was their impure (''apūtā'') speech.<ref name=fx64_ve2_348> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 27;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 438.</ref> Theirs was the craving for knowledge<ref name=fx65_ve2_348> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 8, 8;<br> v. 1, 1.</ref> and the life of begging.<ref name=fx66_ve2_348> ''Ibid.,'' iii. 4, 1;<br> iv. 4, 26.</ref> False Brahmins are those who do not fulfil their duties<ref name=fx67_ve2_348> ''Ibid.,'' vi. 4, 4.</ref> (''cf.'' '''[[ब्रह्मबन्धु|Brahmabandhu]]''') .  But the penances for breach of duty are, in the Sūtras, of a very light and unimportant character.<ref name=fx68_ve2_348> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 18, etc.</ref><br><br>7. ''Brahminical Studies.''--The aim of the priest is to obtain pre-eminence in sacred knowledge (''brahma-varcasam''), as is stated in numerous passages of Vedic literature.<ref name=fx69_ve2_348> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 7, 1;<br> vii. 5, 18, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], v. 14;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 22;<br> xxvii. 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 13, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 11, 6-9;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 2, 6, 10;<br> x. 3, 5, 16;<br> xi. 4, 4, 1;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 3, 5.</ref> Such distinction is not indeed confined to the Brahmin: the king has it also, but it is not really in a special manner appropriate to the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]].<ref name=fx70_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 3, 6;<br> xiii. 1, 5, 3, 5;<br> 2, 6, 9.</ref> Many ritual acts are specified as leading to Brahmavarcasa,<ref name=fx71_ve2_348> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 1, 1;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxiii. 7, 3, etc.;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 3, 1, 31, etc.</ref> but more stress is laid on the study of the sacred texts: the importance of such study is repeatedly insisted upon.<ref name=fx72_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 2, 3;<br> xi. 3, 3, 3-6;<br> 5, 7, 10.</ref><br><br>The technical name for study is [[स्वाध्याय|Svādhyāya]]: the Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] is eloquent upon its advantages,<ref name=fx73_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 6, 3, 9;<br> 7, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 13.</ref> and it is asserted that the joy of the learned [[श्रोत्रिय|Śrotriya]], or ‘student,’ is equal to the highest joy possible.<ref name=fx74_ve2_348> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 3, 35-39;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ix. 8.</ref> '''[[नाक|Nāka]] [[मौद्गल्य|Maudgalya]]''' held that study and the teaching of others were the true penance (''[[तपस्|tapas]]'').<ref name=fx75_ve2_348> ''Ibid.,'' vii. 8. 10.</ref> The object was the ‘threefold knowledge’ (''trayī [[विद्या|vidyā]]''), that of the Ṛc, [[यजुस्|Yajus]], and Sāman,<ref name=fx76_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 4, 2. 3;<br> ii. 6, 4, 2-7;<br> iv. 6, 7, 1, 2;<br> v. 5, 5, 9;<br> vi. 3, 1, 10. 11. 20;<br> x. 5, 2, 1. 2;<br> xi. 5, 4, 18;<br> xii. 3, 3, 2, etc.</ref> a student of all three Vedas being called ''tri-śukriya''<ref name=fx77_ve2_348> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 7.</ref> or ''tri-[[शुक्र|śukra]],''<ref name=fx78_ve2_348> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 1, 2.</ref> ‘thrice pure.’ Other objects of study are enumerated in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx79_ve2_348> xi. 5, 7, 5-8.</ref> in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx80_ve2_348> ii. 9. 10.</ref> the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx81_ve2_348> vii. 1, 2, 4;<br> 2, 1;<br> 7, 1.</ref> etc. (See '''[[इतिहास|Itihāsa]], [[पुराण|Purāṇa]]; [[गाथा|Gāthā]], [[नाराशंसी|Nārāśaṃsī]]; [[ब्रह्मोद्य|Brahmodya]]; [[अनुशासन|Anuśāsana]], [[अनुव्याख्यान|Anuvyākhyāna]], [[अन्वाख्यान|Anvākhyāna]], [[कल्प|Kalpa]],''' 2. '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]; [[विद्या|Vidyā]], [[क्षत्रविद्या|Kṣatravidyā]], [[देवजनविद्या|Devajanavidyā]], [[नक्षत्रविद्या|Nakṣatravidyā]], [[भूतविद्या|Bhūtavidyā]], [[सर्पविद्या|Sarpavidyā]]; [[अथर्वाङ्गिरसः|Atharvāṅgirasaḥ]], [[दैव|Daiva]], [[निधि|Nidhi]], [[पित्र्य|Pitrya]], Rāśi; [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],''' etc.) <br><br>Directions as to the exact place and time of study are given in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx82_ve2_348> ii. 11. 12-15.</ref> and in the Sūtras. If study is carried on in the village, it is to be done silently (''manasā''); if outside, aloud (''vācā'').<br><br>Learning is expected even from persons not normally competent as teachers, such as the '''Carakas,''' who are recognized in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx83_ve2_348> iv. 2, 4. 1.</ref> as possible sources of information. Here, too, may be mentioned the cases of Brahmins learning from princes, though their absolute value is doubtful, for the priests would naturally represent their patrons as interested in their sacred science: it is thus not necessary to see in these notices any real and independent study on the part of the Kṣatriyas.<ref name=fx84_ve2_348> ''Cf.'' (1) '''[[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]''' and (2) '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]].'''</ref> '''[[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]]''' learnt from '''[[जनक|Janaka]],'''<ref name=fx85_ve2_348> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 6, 2, 5.</ref> '''[[उद्दालक आरुणि|Uddālaka Āruṇi]]''' and two other Brahmins from '''[[प्रवाहण जैवलि|Pravāhaṇa Jaivali]],'''<ref name=fx86_ve2_348> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 11;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 3, 1, and i. 8, 1. ''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5. 436, 514-516.</ref> '''[[दृप्तबालाकि गार्ग्य|Dṛptabālāki Gārgya]]''' from '''[[अजातशत्रु|Ajātaśatru]],'''<ref name=fx87_ve2_348> Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upanisad, ii. 1, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1.</ref> and five Brahmins under the lead of Aruṇa from '''[[अश्वपति|Aśvapati]] [[कैकेय|Kaikeya]].'''<ref name=fx88_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 6, 1, 2.</ref> A few notices show the real educators of thought: wandering scholars went through the country<ref name=fx89_ve2_348> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 3, 1. ''Cf.'' iii. 7, 1.</ref> and engaged in disputes and discussions in which a prize was staked by the disputants.<ref name=fx90_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 4, 1, 1.</ref> Moreover, kings like [[जनक|Janaka]] offered rewards to the most learned of the Brahmins;<ref name=fx91_ve2_348> ''Ibid.,'' xi. 6, 3, 1;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 1-9, 20. 29.</ref> [[अजातशत्रु|Ajātaśatru]] was jealous of his renown, and imitated his generosity. Again, learned women are several times mentioned in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx92_ve2_348> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 29;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 9;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 3, 1;<br> 7, 1. ''Cf.'' Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 4;<br> Sāṅkhāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 10.</ref><br><br>A special form of disputation was the '''[[ब्रह्मोद्य|Brahmodya]],''' for which there was a regular place at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’)<ref name=fx93_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 2, 11.</ref> and at the Daśarātra (‘ten-day festival’).<ref name=fx94_ve2_348> ''Ibid.,'' iv. 6, 9, 20.</ref> The reward of learning was the gaining of the title of Kavi or [[विप्र|Vipra]], ‘sage.’<ref name=fx95_ve2_348> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 9, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 3, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 2. 7;<br> iii. 5, 3, 12. ''Cf.'' also Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upanisad, vi. 4, 29.</ref> <br><br>8. ''The Functions of the Brahmin.''--The Brahmin was required not merely to practise individual culture, but also to give others the advantage of his skill, either as a teacher or as a sacrificial priest, or as a [[पुरोहित|Purohita]].<br><br>As a teacher the Brahmin has, of course, the special duty of instructing his own son in both study and sacrificial ritual.<ref name=fx96_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 2, 4.</ref> The texts give examples of this, such as [[आरुणि|Āruṇi]] and '''[[श्वेतकेतु|Śvetaketu]],'''<ref name=fx97_ve2_348> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 1. (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 2, 1 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> or mythically Varuṇa and [[भृगु|Bhṛgu]].<ref name=fx98_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 6, 1, 1.</ref> This fact also appears from some of the names in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx99_ve2_348> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 376.</ref> of the [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]] and the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx100_ve2_348> xv. 1.</ref> On the other hand, these Vaṃśas and the Vaṃśas of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] show that a father often preferred to let his son study under a famous teacher. The relation of pupil and teacher is described under '''[[ब्रह्मचर्य|Brahmacarya]].''' A teacher might take several pupils,<ref name=fx101_ve2_348> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, vii. 3.</ref> and he was bound to teach them with all his heart and soul.<ref name=fx102_ve2_348> See [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, vii. 4 (''Indische Studien,'' 2, 211).</ref> He was bound to reveal everything to his pupil, at any rate to one who was staying with him for a year (''[[संवत्सर|saṃvatsara]]-vāsin''),<ref name=fx103_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1, 1, 26. 27. ''Cf.'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 3, 3.</ref> an expression which shows, as was natural, that a pupil might easily change teachers. But, nevertheless, certain cases of learning kept secret and only revealed to special persons are enumerated.<ref name=fx104_ve2_348> So the Vasiṣṭhas and the Stomabhāgas, [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xv. 5, 24;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 2, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 17;<br> [[प्रवाहण जैवलि|Pravāhaṇa Jaivali]] and his knowledge of [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 11;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 3, where the claim is made that the ''praśāsana'' belongs to the Kṣatriyas. Śaṅkara, in his commentary, takes the word to mean the ‘giving of instruction,’ but this must be regarded as improbable, ‘rule’ being more probably the sense. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 128;<br> Bo7htlingk, Translation of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 8, 9.</ref> The exact times and modes of teaching are elaborately laid down in the Sūtras,<ref name=fx105_ve2_348> Rigveda Prātiśākhya, xv. 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 3, 3;<br> and see Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 10, 129-135.</ref> but not in the earlier texts.<br><br>As priest the Brahmin operated in all the greater sacrifices; the simple domestic (''[[गृह्य|gṛhya]]'') rites could normally be performed without his help, but not the more important rites (''śrauta'').  The number varied: the ritual literature requires sixteen priests to be employed at the greatest sacrifices (see '''[[ऋत्व्इज्|Ṛtvij]]'''), but other rites could be accomplished with four,<ref name=fx106_ve2_348> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 3, 6, 1-4;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 4, 2. The four are the [[होतृ|Hotṛ]], [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]], Agnīdh, and Upavaktṛ: Weber, 10, 139, n. 4.</ref> five,<ref name=fx107_ve2_348> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ix. 13;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 4, 2, with a second [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]], as well as the four enumerated in the previous note.</ref> six,<ref name=fx108_ve2_348> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ix. 13;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 2, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 4, 6;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 7, 2, 6, where the list has [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]], [[होतृ|Hotṛ]], [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], with the [[प्रतिप्रस्थातृ|Pratiprasthātṛ]], Maitrāvaruṇa, Āgnīdhra.</ref> seven,<ref name=fx109_ve2_348> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ix. 13;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 2, 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 5;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 4, 2. The number seems to be made up of the five of note 107 and the Abhigarau--''i.e.,'' probably the Abhigara and the Apagara.</ref> or ten<ref name=fx110_ve2_348> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhita, ix. 8, 13-16;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 4, 1;<br> 3, 6, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 25;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 4, 2. What ten are meant is uncertain;<br> the four of note 106 are enumerated.</ref> priests. Again, the Kauṣītakins<ref name=fx111_ve2_348> ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 4, 2, 19;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 37.</ref> had a seventeenth priest beside the usual sixteen, the [[सदस्य|Sadasya]], so called because he watched the performance from the [[सदस्|Sadas]], ‘seat.’ In one rite, the Sattra (‘sacrificial session’) of the serpents, the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx112_ve2_348> xxv. 14, 3.</ref> adds three more to the sixteen, a second Unnetṛ, an Abhigara, and an Apagara. The later ritual places the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] at the head of all the priests, but this is probably not the early view (see '''[[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]]''').<br><br>The sacrifice ensured, if properly performed, primarily the advantages of the sacrificer (''yajamāna''),<ref name=fx113_ve2_348> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 1, 20;<br> 9, 1, 12;<br> ii. 2, 2, 7;<br> iii. 4, 2, 15;<br> iv. 2, 5, 9, 10;<br> viii. 5, 3, 8;<br> ix. 5, 2, 16;<br> xii. 8, 1, 17, etc.</ref> but the priest shared in the profit, besides securing the '''Dakṣiṇās.''' Disputes between sacrificers and the priests were not rare, as in the case of '''Viśvantara''' and the '''Śyāparṇas,'''<ref name=fx114_ve2_348> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 27 ''et seq.;<br>'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 436 ''et seq.''</ref> or '''[[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]]''' and the '''Asitamṛgas;'''<ref name=fx115_ve2_348> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 27.</ref> and the '''Aiṣāvīras''' are referred to as undersirable priests.<ref name=fx116_ve2_348> ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 2, 7, 32, where Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 153, n. 1, interprets [[ऐषावीर|Aiṣāvīra]], not as a proper name, but as meaning ‘contemptible’;<br> but Sāyaṇa thinks a proper name is meant, a view accepted by Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 45, n. 2.</ref> Moreover, '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]''' once held the post of [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] to '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]],''' but gave place to '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]].''' <br><br>The position of '''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]]''' differed considerably from that of the ordinary priest, for the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] not merely might officiate at the sacrifice, but was the officiator in all the private sacrifices of his king. Hence he could, and undoubtedly sometimes did, obtain great influence over his master in matters of secular importance; and the power of the priesthood in political as opposed to domestic and religious matters, no doubt rested on the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]].<br><br>There is no recognition in Vedic literature of the rule later prevailing by which, after spending part of his life as a Brahmacārin, and part as a householder, the Brahmin became an ascetic<ref name=fx117_ve2_348> See Deussen, ''Philosophy of the Upanishads,'' 372 ''et seq.''</ref> (later divided into the two stages of Vānaprastha, ‘forest-dweller,’ and Saṃnyāsin, ‘mystic’). Yājñavalkya's case<ref name=fx118_ve2_348> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 4, 1;<br> iv. 5, 1. See iii. 5, 1, for his teaching, of which his action is a logical consequence.</ref> shows that study of the Absolute might empty life of all its content for the sage, and drive him to abandon wife and family. In Buddhist times the same phenomenon is seen<ref name=fx119_ve2_348> Fick, ''Die sociale Gliederung,'' 40 ''et seq.;<br>'' Oldenberg, ''Buddha,''^5 72 ''et seq.''</ref> applying to other than Brahmins. The Buddhist texts are here confirmed in some degree by the Greek authorities.<ref name=fx120_ve2_348> Arrian, ''Indica,'' xii. 8. 9;<br> Strabo, xv. 1, 49, 60.</ref> The practice bears a certain resemblance to the habit of kings, in the Epic tradition,<ref name=fx121_ve2_348> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 179 ''et seq.''</ref> of retiring to the forest when active life is over.<br><br>From the Greek authorities<ref name=fx122_ve2_348> See Fick, ''loc. cit.''</ref> it also appears--what is certainly the case in the Buddhist literature<ref name=fx123_ve2_348> Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 57.</ref> --that Brahmins practised the most diverse occupations. It is difficult to say how far this was true for the Vedic period. The analogy of the Druids<ref name=fx124_ve2_348> Cæsar, ''Bellum Gallicum,'' vi. 14. The Druids did not fight, did not pay tribute, studied for many years, observed secrecy as to matters of ritual and learning, did not use writing, and had a certain belief in transmigration. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 19.</ref> --in some respects very close--suggests that the Brahmins may have been mainly confined to their professional tasks, including all the learned professions such as astronomy<ref name=fx125_ve2_348> Hence the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] is the 28th '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]]:''' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 3, 3;<br> Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 306, 311;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 40.</ref>  and so forth. This is not contradicted by any Vedic evidence, for instance, the poet of a hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx126_ve2_348> ix. 112.</ref> says he is a poet, his father a physician ('''[[भिषज्|Bhiṣaj]]'''), and his mother a grinder of corn ('''[[उपल-प्रक्षिणी|Upala-prakṣiṇī]]'''). This would seem to show that a Brahmin could be a doctor, while his wife would perform the ordinary household duties. So a [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] could perhaps take the field to assist the king by prayer, as [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]],<ref name=fx127_ve2_348> Rv. iii. 33. 53.</ref> and later on [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]]<ref name=fx128_ve2_348> Rv. vii. 18.</ref> do, but this does not show that priests normally fought. Nor do they seem normally to have been agriculturists or merchants. On the other hand, they kept cattle: a Brahmacārin's duty was to watch his master's cattle.<ref name=fx129_ve2_348> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 4, 5;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 1, 6.</ref> It is therefore needless to suppose that they could not, and did not, on occasion turn to agricultural or mercantile pursuits, as they certainly did later. But it must be remembered that in all probability there was more purity of blood, and less pressure of life, among the Brahmins of the Vedic age than later in Buddhist times, when the Vedic sacrificial apparatus was falling into grave disrepute.<br><br>It is clear that the Brahmins, whatever their defects, represented the intellectual side of Vedic life, and that the Kṣatriyas, if they played a part in that life, did so only in a secondary degree, and to a minor extent. It is natural to suppose that the Brahmins also composed ballads, the precursors of the epic; for though none such have survived, a few stanzas of this character, celebrating the generosity of patrons, have been preserved by being embedded in priestly compositions. A legend in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx130_ve2_348> i. 4, 1, 14-17. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 257, 277, 278, and [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 44.<br><br>Almost all that can be said of the Brahmins is collected in Weber's ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 40-158. ''Cf.'' also Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 220-226;<br> Fick, ''Die sociale Gliederung'' (for Buddhist times;<br> the evidence is, however, of uncertain, and much of it probably of late, date);<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 82, 182, etc. (for notices of the Brahmins in the Epic): ''The Mutual Relations of the Four Castes according to the Mānavadharmacāstram'' (for the [[धर्म|Dharma]] view). Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 248 ''et seq.,'' discusses the priesthood in the Rigveda, and Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 197212, gives an excellent summary of the facts.</ref> shows clearly that the Brahmins regarded civilization as being spread by them only:  '''[[कोसल|Kosala]]''' and '''[[विदेह|Videha]],''' no doubt settled by Āryan tribes, are only rendered civilized and habitable by the influence of pious Brahmins. We need not doubt that the non-Brahminical tribes (see '''[[व्रात्य|Vrātya]]''') had attained intellectual as well as material civilization, but it is reasonable to assume that their civilization was inferior to that of the Brahmins, for the history of Hinduism is the conquest by the Brahmins--not by arms, but by mind--of the tribes Āryan and non-Āryan originally beyond the pale.

ब्राह्मण
<u>'''2. Brāhmaṇa,'''</u> ‘religious explanation,’<ref name=fx1_ve2_349> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 25, 15;<br> iii. 45, 8;<br> vi. 25, 1, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 9, 5;<br> 5, 2, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 4, 1, etc. In the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, i. and ii., the use is constant.</ref> is the title of a class of books which as such are only mentioned in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_349> ii. 16;<br> xiii. 7.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx3_ve2_349> ii. 10.</ref> and then in the Sūtras, where the names of the Brāhmaṇas occur, showing that literary works were in existence.

ब्राह्मण
<u>'''3. Brāhmaṇa'''</u> is taken by Roth in the St. Petersburg Dictionary<ref name=fx1_ve2_350> ''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 253, n. 26.</ref> to mean the ‘Soma cup of the Brahman’ in two passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_350> i. 15, 5;<br> ii. 36, 5.</ref> and one of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx3_ve2_350> xx. 2, 3.</ref>

ब्राह्मणाच्-छंसिन्
<u>'''Brāhmaṇāc-chaṃsin'''</u> (‘reciting after the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]--''i.e.,'' Brahman’) is the name of a priest in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_351> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 4, 2;<br> 6, 3. 4;<br> 10, 1;<br> 18, 5;<br> vii. 1, 2;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxviii. 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 6, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 2, 3, 13, etc.</ref> In the technical division of the sacrificial priests ('''[[ऋत्व्इज्|Ṛtvij]]''') he is classed with the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_351> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 144.</ref> but it is clear that he was really a [[होत्रक|Hotraka]] or assistant of the [[होतृ|Hotṛ]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_351> ''E.g.,'' Āśvalāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], v. 10, 10;<br> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 9, 374-376.</ref> According to Oldenberg,<ref name=fx4_ve2_351> ''Religion des Veda,'' 396.</ref> he was known to the Rigveda as '''[[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]].''' This is denied by Geldner,<ref name=fx5_ve2_351> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 145 ''et seq. Cf.'' '''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]].'''</ref> who sees in [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] merely the ‘superintending priest’ or the ‘priest.’ 

ब्लेष्क
<u>'''Bleṣka'''</u> in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_352> xxiii. 6;<br> xxxvii. 13. 14.</ref> denotes a rope or noose for strangling. It is spelt [[व्लेष्क|Vleṣka]] in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve2_352> iii. 6, 10. In Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 19, 1, ''meṣka'' is read.</ref>

भग
<u>'''Bhaga'''</u> denotes a part of the chariot in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_353> ii. 34, 8.</ref> according to Hillebrandt.<ref name=fx2_ve2_353> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 95.</ref>

भगिनी
<u>'''Bhaginī,'''</u> ‘sister,’ literally the ‘fortunate one’ in so far as she has a brother, occurs in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (iii. 6).<br>==Foot Notes==

भगी-रथ ऐक्ष्वाक
<u>'''Bhagī-[[रथ|ratha]] Aikṣvāka'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[इक्ष्वाकु|Ikṣvāku]]'''’) is the name of a king in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iv. 6, 1. 2). It is important to note that he is regarded as being on friendly terms with the '''Kuru-Pañcālas,''' which points to the Ikṣvākus being allied to that people, and not belonging (as is the case in the Buddhist books) to the east of India.<br>==Foot Notes==

भङ्ग
<u>'''Bhaṅga,'''</u> ‘hemp,’ is mentioned in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_356> xi. 6, 15;<br> conceivably in [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 14, but not probably.</ref> In the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_356> ix. 61, 13.</ref> it is an epithet of Soma, presumably<ref name=fx3_ve2_356> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 299.</ref> in the sense of ‘intoxicating,’ which then came to designate hemp.<ref name=fx4_ve2_356> Hence the modern ‘Bang’ or Bhang,’ an intoxicant made from the dried leaves and small stalks of hemp, taken either by smoking or by eating when mixed up into a sweetmeat.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 68;<br> Grierson, ''Indian Antiquary,'' 23, 260;<br> Yule and Burnell, ''Hobson-Jobson, s.v. Bang.''</ref>

भङ्गाश्विन
<u>'''Bhaṅgāśvina'''</u> is the name of the father of '''Ṛtuparna''' in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_357> xx. 12.</ref> In the Mahābhārata<ref name=fx2_ve2_357> iii. 2745.</ref> he is called Bhāṅgāsuri. In the Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_357> xxi. 20;<br> Caland, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 57, 745.</ref> mention is made of [[ऋतुपर्ण|Ṛtuparṇa]]-Kayovadhī as the Bhaṅgyaśvinau. 

भङ्ग्य-श्रवस्
<u>'''Bhaṅgya-śravas'''</u> is the name of a man in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx1_ve2_358> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 78.</ref>

भजे-रथ
<u>'''Bhaje-ratha'''</u> is mentioned in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_359> x. 60, 2.</ref> where Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve2_359> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 138, 165.</ref> thinks a place-name is meant. Griffith<ref name=fx3_ve2_359> ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 463.</ref> is doubtful whether the word is the name of a place or a man. Roth<ref name=fx4_ve2_359> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> was inclined to see a corruption of the text.<ref name=fx5_ve2_359> Grassmann, ''Wo7rterbuch, s.v.,'' thinks that the compound should be read as two words: ''bhaje rathasya (satpatim),'' ‘to win (the lord) of the car.’</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Bhagīratha.'''

भद्र-पदा
<u>'''Bhadra-padā.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

भद्र-सेन आजातशत्रव
<u>'''Bhadra-sena Ājātaśatrava'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[अजातशत्रु|Ajātaśatru]]'''’) is the name of a man, presumably a prince, whom '''Uddālaka''' is said in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (v. 5, 5, 14) to have bewitched.<br>==Foot Notes==

भय-द आसमात्य
<u>'''Bhaya-da Āsamātya'''</u> (‘descendant of '''Asamāti'''’) is the name of a king in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_362> iv. 8, 7.</ref> Oertel,<ref name=fx2_ve2_362> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 247.</ref> however, seems to take the name as Abhayada, but this is not probable, for Bhayada is a name in the Purāṇas.

भयमान
<u>'''Bhayamāna'''</u> is, according to Sāyaṇa, the name of a man in one hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_363> i. 100, 17. ''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 266.</ref> which is ascribed by the Anukramaṇī (Index) to his authorship. The interpretation is, however, uncertain.

भरत
<u>'''Bharata'''</u> is the name of a people of great importance in the Rigveda and the later literature. In the Rigveda they appear prominently in the third and seventh Maṇḍalas in connexion  with '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]]''' and the '''Tṛtsus,'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_364> iii. 53, 9. 12, 24;<br> 33, 11, 12 (Viśvā [[मित्र|mitra]], who is accordingly hailed as ''[[भरत|Bharata]]-[[ऋषभ|ṛṣabha]],'' ‘bull of the Bharatas,’ in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 17, 7);<br> vii. 8, 4;<br> 33, 6, in which passage a defeat of the Bharatas, and their rescue by the aid of [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]], is clearly referred to;<br> not, as was formerly thought (''e.g.,'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 354;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 127), a defeat of the Bharatas by the Tṛtsus.</ref> while in the sixth Maṇḍala they are associated with '''Divodāsa.'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_364> vi. 16, 4. 5. ''Cf.'' verse 19.</ref> In one passage<ref name=fx3_ve2_364> vii. 8, 4.</ref> the Bharatas are, like the Tṛtsus, enemies of the '''Pūrus:''' there can be little doubt that Ludwig's view of the identity of the Bharatas and and Tṛtsus is practically correct. More precisely Oldenberg<ref name=fx5_ve2_364> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 207. In ''Buddha,'' 405 ''et seq.,'' he accepted the identification of Ludwig.</ref> considers that the Tṛtsus are the '''Vasiṣṭhas,''' the family singers of the Bharatas; while Geldner<ref name=fx6_ve2_364> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 136 ''et seq.''</ref> recognizes, with perhaps more probability, in the Tṛtsus the royal family of the Bharatas. That the Tṛtsus and Bharatas were enemies, as Zimmer<ref name=fx7_ve2_364> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 127. This is also Bloomfield's view (see ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 41, 42).</ref> holds, is most improbable even on geographical grounds, for the Tṛtsus in Zimmer's view<ref name=fx8_ve2_364> ''Op. cit.,'' 124.</ref> occupied the country to the east of the '''[[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]]''' (Ravi), and the Bharatas must therefore be regarded as coming against the Tṛtsus from the west, whereas the Rigveda<ref name=fx9_ve2_364> iii. 23, 4: in verse 2 '''Devasravas''' and '''[[देववात|Devavāta]]''' are mentioned as Bhāratas, Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 410, n., mentions that in the Mahābhārata, iii. 6065, a tributary of the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] is called Kauśikī, and the Kuśikas are, of course, the family of [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]], whose connexion with the Bharatas is beyond question.</ref> recognizes two [[भरत|Bharata]] chiefs on the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]], [[आपया|Āpayā]],''' and '''[[दृषद्वती|Dṛṣadvatī]]'''--that is, in the holy land of India, the '''[[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]].''' Hillebrandt<ref name=fx10_ve2_364> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 111. His view is that [[सुदास्|Sudās]] and the Bharatas were later comers than the Tṛtsus, who joined them as one people, the Vasiṣṭhas becoming the priests of the Bharatas. He suggests that the Vasiṣṭhas were not originally adherents of the IndraSoma cult, but were specially devoted to the Varuṇa cult;<br> but there is no decisive evidence for either suggestion. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, as cited in n. 7.</ref> sees in the connexion of the Tṛtsus and the Bharatas a fusion of two tribes; but this is not supported by any evidence beyond the fact that in his opinion some such theory is needed to explain Divodāsa's appearing in connexion with the '''[[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]]''' family, while [[सुदास्|Sudās]], his son,<br><br>^4 Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 172 ''et seq.''  or perhaps grandson (''cf.'' '''[[पिजवन|Pijavana]]'''), is connected with the Vasiṣṭhas and the '''Viśvāmitras.'''<br><br>In the later literature the Bharatas appear as especially famous. The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx11_ve2_364> xiii. 5, 4.</ref> mentions [[भरत|Bharata]] [[दौःषन्ति|Dauḥṣanti]] as a king, sacrificer of the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) and '''[[शतानीक सात्राजित|Śatānīka Sātrājita]],''' as another [[भरत|Bharata]] who offered that sacrifice. The [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx12_ve2_364> viii. 23 and 21.</ref> mentions [[भरत|Bharata]] [[दौःषन्ति|Dauḥṣanti]] as receiving the kingly coronation from '''[[दीर्घतमस्|Dīrghatamas]] [[मामतेय|Māmateya]],''' and Śatānīka as being consecrated by '''[[सोमशुष्मन् वाजरत्नायन|Somaśuṣman Vājaratnāyana]],''' a priest whose name is of quite late origin. The geographical position of the [[भरत|Bharata]] people is clearly shown by the fact that the [[भरत|Bharata]] kings win victories over the '''Kāśis,''' and make offerings on the '''[[यमुना|Yamunā]]''' (Jumna) and '''[[गङ्गा|Gaṅgā]]''' (Ganges).<ref name=fx13_ve2_364> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 11. 21.</ref> Moreover, in the formula of the king's proclamation for the people, the variants recorded<ref name=fx14_ve2_364> In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 10, 2, and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 4, 2, the phrase is ''eṣa vo, Bharatā, rājā;<br>'' the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, in the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension, xi. 3, 3;<br> 6, 3, has ''Kuravaḥ, Pañcālāḥ'' (evidently as a joint people);<br> Āpastamba, xviii. 12, 7, gives ''Bharatāḥ, Kuravaḥ, Pañcālāḥ, Kuru-Pañcālāḥ,'' and ''janatāḥ,'' as alternatives, according to the people to whom the king belongs;<br> the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 7, and the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 7, read ''esa te janate rājā.'' See Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 114, n.;<br> von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 465.</ref> include ''Kuravaḥ, Pañcālāḥ, Kuru-Pañcālāḥ,'' and ''Bharatāḥ;'' and the Mahābhārata consistently recognizes the royal family of the '''Kurus''' as a [[भरत|Bharata]] family.<ref name=fx15_ve2_364> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 409.</ref> It is therefore extremely probable that Oldenberg<ref name=fx16_ve2_364> ''Op. cit.,'' 408. He points out (409, n.) that in the Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, only the Kuru king. '''[[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]],''' and the [[भरत|Bharata]] kings are mentioned without specification of the peoples over whom they ruled.</ref> is right in holding that the Bharatas in the times of the Brāhmaṇas were merging in the Kuru-[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]] people.<br><br>The ritual practices of the Bharatas are repeatedly mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx17_ve2_364> xiv. 3, 13;<br> xv. 5, 24, and perhaps xviii. 10, 8, on which see Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 28, n. 2;<br> below, p. 98.</ref> the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx18_ve2_364> ii. 25;<br> iii. 18. The sense ‘mercenary soldier,’ here seen by the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 2 (no longer mentioned in the Dictionary of Bo7htlingk), cannot be accepted. See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 254;<br> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 407, n. On the other hand, there is no mention of the Bharatas in the geographical lists of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 14). in the [[मानव|Mānava]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] Śāstra, or in the Buddhist texts. This means that the Bharatas were no longer a people, but a family or sub-tribe in a larger people.</ref> the  Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx19_ve2_364> v. 4, 4, 1.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx20_ve2_364> i. 27, 2.</ref> Already in the Rigveda<ref name=fx21_ve2_364> ii. 7, 1. 5;<br> iv. 25, 4;<br> vi. 16, 19;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 9, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 2, 2. Roth thinks this epithet of Agni perhaps means ‘warlike,’ but this is unlikely.</ref> there is mention made of Agni [[भारत|Bhārata]] (‘of the Bharatas’). In the Āprī hymns<ref name=fx22_ve2_364> Rv. i. 22, 10;<br> 142, 9;<br> 188, 8;<br> ii. 1, 11;<br> 3, 8;<br> iii. 4, 8, etc.</ref> occurs a goddess Bhāratī, the personified divine protective power of the Bharatas: her association in the hymns with [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] reflects the connexion of the Bharatas with the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx9_ve2_364/> Again, in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx23_ve2_364> i. 4, 2, 2.</ref> Agni is referred to as ''[[ब्राह्मण|brāhmaṇa]] [[भारत|Bhārata]],'' ‘priest of the Bharatas,’ and is invited to dispose of the offering ''Manuṣvat Bharatavat,'' ‘like Manu,’ ‘like [[भरत|Bharata]].’<ref name=fx24_ve2_364> i. 5, 1, 7.</ref><br><br>In one or two passages<ref name=fx25_ve2_364> i. 112, 14;<br> vii. 19, 8.</ref> [[सुदास्|Sudās]] or Divodāsa and, on the other hand, [[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]] or [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]] appear in a friendly relation. Possibly this points, as Oldenberg<ref name=fx26_ve2_364> ''Op. cit.,'' 410.</ref> suggests, to the union of Bharatas and Pūrus with the Kurus.<br><br>A [[भरत|Bharata]] is referred to in the fifth Maṇḍala of the Rigveda:<ref name=fx27_ve2_364> v. 54, 14.<br><br>For a later legend of [[भरत|Bharata]], ''cf.'' Leumann, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 80 ''et seq.;<br>'' von Bradke, ''ibid.,'' 498-503;<br> and see Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 13, 338, 340, etc.</ref> who he was is uncertain.

भरद्-वाज
<u>'''Bharad-vāja'''</u> is the name of the reputed<ref name=fx1_ve2_365> ''Cf.'' Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 2;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 10;<br> Bṛhaddevatā, v. 102 ''et seq.,'' where he is said to be a son of [[बृहस्पति|Bṛhaspati]], and a grandson of [[अङ्गिरस्|Aṅgiras]] (''cf.'' Rv. vi. 2, 10;<br> 11, 3, etc.);<br> Arnold, ''Vedic Metre,'' 61, 62.</ref> author of the sixth Maṇḍala of the Rigveda. The attribution is so far correct that [[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_365> Rv. vi. 15, 3;<br> 16, 5. 33;<br> 17, 4;<br> 31, 4;<br> 48, 7. 13;<br> 63, 10;<br> 65, 6. See also Rv. i. 112, 13;<br> 116, 18;<br> x. 150, 5;<br> 181, 2.</ref> and the Bharadvājas<ref name=fx3_ve2_365> Rv. vi. 10, 6;<br> 16, 33;<br> 17, 14;<br> 23, 10;<br> 25, 9;<br> 35, 4;<br> 47, 25;<br> 59, 15. See also Rv. i. 59, 7.</ref> are repeatedly mentioned as singers in that Maṇḍala. Judging by the tone of the references to [[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]], he can hardly be deemed to have been a contemporary of any of the hymns.<ref name=fx4_ve2_365> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 210 212.</ref> According to the Pañcaviṃśa  [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx5_ve2_365> xv. 3, 7.</ref> he was the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of '''Divodāsa.''' This interpretation is to be preferred to that of Roth,<ref name=fx6_ve2_365> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' See Rv. i. 116, 18;<br> vi. 16, 5;<br> 31, 4.</ref> who suggests that he and Divodāsa were identical. His connexion with the house of Divodāsa also appears from the statement of the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx7_ve2_365> xxi. 10 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 478).</ref> that [[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]] gave '''[[प्रतर्दन|Pratardana]]''' the kingdom. It is unnecessary to suppose that the same [[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]] was meant in both cases, and that [[प्रतर्दन|Pratardana]] was a son of Divodāsa: the later Saṃhitās refer to [[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]], like the other great sages, irrespective of chronology.<br><br>The Bharadvājas in their poems mention '''[[बृबु|Bṛbu]], [[बृसय|Bṛsaya]],''' and the '''Pārāvatas.'''<ref name=fx8_ve2_365> vi. 61, 1-3.</ref> Hillebrandt<ref name=fx9_ve2_365> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 104.</ref> has pointed out that they are also connected with the '''Sṛñjayas.''' In particular, the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx10_ve2_365> xvi. 11, 11.</ref> mentions that [[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]] gained largesse from '''[[प्रस्तोक|Prastoka]] [[सार्ञ्जय|Sārñjaya]]''' and [[बृबु|Bṛbu]]. But it is very doubtful if it is correct to place all these people and Divodāsa in Arachosia and Drangiana.<br><br>[[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]] as an author and a seer is frequently referred to in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx11_ve2_365> Av. ii. 12, 2;<br> iv. 29, 5;<br> xviii. 3, 16;<br> xix. 48, 6;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvi. 19;<br> xx. 9;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 7, 19;<br> iv. 8, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 55, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx12_ve2_365> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 18;<br> viii. 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 10, 11, 13;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 2, 2;<br> 4, 2;<br> ii. 2, 2. 4, etc.;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xv. 1;<br> xxix. 3;<br> xxx. 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 128;<br> Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 31.</ref>

भरन्त्
<u>'''Bharant,'''</u> ‘bearing,’ in the plural denotes in one passage of the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_366> xviii. 10, 8.</ref> according to Bo7htlingk,<ref name=fx2_ve2_366> Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> following Sāyaṇa, ‘the warrior caste,’ but the sense is not certain. Weber<ref name=fx3_ve2_366> ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 28, n. 2. ''Cf.'' '''[[भरत|Bharata]],''' n. 17.</ref> was inclined to see a reference to the Bharatas, though the form of the word is that of the present participle.<ref name=fx4_ve2_366> ''Bharatām,'' interpreted by Sāyaṇa as ''bharaṇaṃ kurvatām kṣatriyāṇām.''</ref>

भरूजी
<u>'''Bharūjī'''</u> in one passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_367> ii. 24. 8.</ref> may denote, according to Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve2_367> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> a noxious animal. 

भर्तृ
<u>'''Bhartṛ,'''</u> besides having the literal sense of ‘bearer,’ means ‘supporter’ or ‘master’ in the older literature;<ref name=fx1_ve2_368> Av. xi. 7, 15;<br> xviii. 2, 30;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 3, 4, 7 (where ‘husband’ is possible);<br> iv. 6, 7, 21, etc.</ref> but it is doubtful whether the sense of ‘husband’ is ever found there. In one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_368> v. 58, 7.</ref> ‘husband’ is certainly the most natural sense, but, as Delbrück<ref name=fx3_ve2_368> ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 415, n. 1.</ref> correctly remarks, even there ‘father’ may be meant, since ‘mother’ is here and there<ref name=fx4_ve2_368> Av. v. 5, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 1, 4.</ref> called Bhartrī.

भलानस्
<u>'''Bhalānas,'''</u> plural, is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_369> vii. 18, 7.</ref> of one of the five tribes, '''Pakthas,''' Bhalānases, '''Alinas, Viṣāṇins,''' and '''Śivas,''' who are mentioned as ranged on the side<ref name=fx2_ve2_369> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 260, 261, who takes the form of the name to be Bhalāna (but the text of the Rv. has ''bhalāna¤saḥ''), and who overlooks Zimmer's later view.</ref> of the enemies of '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]]''' in the battle of the ten kings ('''[[दाशराज्ञ|Dāśarājña]]'''), not opposed to them, as Roth,<ref name=fx3_ve2_369> ''Zur Litteratur und Geschichte des Weda,'' 95.</ref> and at one time Zimmer,<ref name=fx4_ve2_369> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 126.</ref> thought. Zimmer<ref name=fx5_ve2_369> ''Op. cit.,'' 431. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 173, 207.</ref> suggests as their original home East Kabulistan, comparing the name of the Bolan pass. This seems a reasonably probable view.

भव-त्रात शायस्थि
<u>'''Bhava-trāta Śāyasthi'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_370> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372;<br> Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 443.</ref>

भस्त्रा
<u>'''Bhastrā'''</u> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 1, 2, 7; 6, 3, 16) denotes a leathern bottle or pouch.<br>==Foot Notes==

भाकुरि
<u>'''Bhākuri.'''</u> See '''[[बेकुरा|Bekurā]].''' <br>==Foot Notes==

भाग-दुघ
<u>'''Bhāga-dugha,'''</u> ‘dealer out of portions,’ ‘distributor,’ is the name of one of the king's ‘jewels’ ('''[[रत्निन्|Ratnin]]''') in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_373> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 9 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 5;<br> iv. 3, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 13.</ref> and Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_373> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 3, 5;<br> iii. 4, 8, 1;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 2, 17;<br> v. 3, 1, 9.</ref> What his functions exactly were is uncertain. Sāyaṇa in some places<ref name=fx3_ve2_373> On [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā and [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.,'' and on Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 1, 9.</ref> renders the word by ‘tax-collector’ but in others<ref name=fx4_ve2_373> On Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 2, 17.<br><br>''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 63, n.</ref> as ‘carver,’ thus making this functionary either a revenue officer or a mere court official.

भाग-वित्ति
<u>'''Bhāga-vitti'''</u> (‘descendant of Bhagavitta’) is the patronymic of a teacher called Cūḍa<ref name=fx1_ve2_374> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 3, 17, 18 Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> or Cūla<ref name=fx2_ve2_374> ''Ibid.,'' vi. 3, 9 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref> in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].

भाडितायन
<u>'''Bhāḍitāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Bhaḍita,’ is the patronymic of '''Śākadāsa''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_375> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373.</ref>

भानुमन्त् औपमन्यव
<u>'''Bhānumant Aupamanyava'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[उपमन्यु|Upamanyu]]'''’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''Ānandaja,''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_376> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref>

भाय-जात्य
<u>'''Bhāya-jātya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Bhayajāta,’ is the patronymic of '''Nikothaka''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_377> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373;<br> Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 444.</ref>

भारत
<u>'''Bhārata.'''</u> See '''[[भरत|Bharata]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

भारद्-वाज
<u>'''Bhārad-vāja,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]],'''’ is the patronymic of many teachers. In the Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], Bhāradvājas are mentioned as  pupils of [[भारद्वाज|Bhāradvāja]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_379> ii. 5, 21;<br> iv. 5, 27 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> '''[[पाराशर्य|Pārāśarya]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_379> ii. 6, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref> '''Balākākauśika,'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_379> iv. 5, 27 Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> '''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]],'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_379> ii. 5, 21;<br> iv. 5, 27 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> '''[[आसुरायण|Āsurāyaṇa]],'''<ref name=fx5_ve2_379> ii. 5, 21;<br> iv. 5, 27 Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> and '''[[बैजवापायन|Baijavāpāyana]].'''<ref name=fx6_ve2_379> ii. 5, 21;<br> iv. 5, 27 Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> A [[भारद्वाज|Bhāradvāja]] occurs in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx7_ve2_379> v. 61, 2.</ref> and '''[[शूष वाह्नेय|Śūṣa Vāhneya]]''' is mentioned as a [[भारद्वाज|Bhāradvāja]] in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx8_ve2_379> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373.</ref>

भारद्वाजायन
<u>'''Bhāradvājāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]],'''’ is the patronymic of a teacher in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_380> x. 12, 1;<br> [[निदान|Nidāna]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 9. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 61, n. 2.</ref>

भारद्वाजी-पुत्र
<u>'''Bhāradvājī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of '''[[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]],'''’ is the metronymic of several teachers in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], pupils of '''Pāraśarīputra,'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_381> vi. 4, 31 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 5, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> '''[[पैङ्गीपुत्र|Paiṅgīputra]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_381> vi. 4, 30 Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> and '''[[वात्सीमाण्डवीपुत्र|Vātsīmāṇḍavīputra]]'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_381> ''Ibid.''</ref> respectively.

भार्गव
<u>'''Bhārgava,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[भृगु|Bhṛgu]],'''’ is the patronymic of several teachers, including '''[[च्यवन|Cyavana]]'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_382> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 5, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. viii. 21.</ref> and '''[[गृत्समद|Gṛtsamada]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_382> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxii. 4 (with a ''varia lectio,'' [[बाभ्रव|Bābhrava]]).</ref> Other Bhārgavas are also mentioned without dication of their personal names.<ref name=fx3_ve2_382> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 18, 1;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, vii. 15;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 2, 1. 5;<br> [[प्रश्न|Praśna]] Upanisad, i. 1 ([[वैदर्भि|Vaidarbhi]]), etc.;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 2, 23;<br> 9, 19, 39, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' xxxv.</ref>

भार्गायण
<u>'''Bhārgāyaṇa,'''</u> ‘descendant of Bharga,’ is the patronymic of '''Sutvan''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 28).<br>==Foot Notes==

भार्म्य्-अश्व
<u>'''Bhārmy-aśva,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[भृम्य्अश्व|Bhṛmyaśva]],’ is the patronymic of '''[[मुद्गल|Mudgala]]''' in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (ix. 23) and the Brhaddevatā (vi. 46; viii. 12). <br>==Foot Notes==

भार्या
<u>'''Bhāryā,'''</u> later a common expression for ‘wife,’ does not occur in that sense at all in the Saṃhitās. It first appears, according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_385> vii. 9. 8.</ref> where, however, Delbrück<ref name=fx2_ve2_385> ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 415. ''Cf.'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 29, 20.</ref> suggests that merely a member of the household (‘who is to be maintained’) may be meant. In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_385> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 4, 1;<br> iv. 5, 1.</ref> however, the two wives of [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]] are so designated.

भालन्दन
<u>'''Bhālandana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Bhalandana,’ is the patronymic of '''Vatsaprī''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,’ the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve2_386> xix. 11.</ref> and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_386> xii. 11, 25;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 59.</ref><br><br>^1 v. 2, 1, 6.

भालुकी-पुत्र
<u>'''Bhālukī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of Bhālukī,’ is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[क्रौञ्चिकीपुत्र|Krauñcikīputra]]'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_387> vi. 5, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref> or of '''[[प्राचीनयोगीपुत्र|Prācīnayogīputra]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_387> vi. 4, 32 Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].

भाल्ल
<u>'''Bhālla'''</u> is the name or patronymic of a teacher who bears the patronymic [[प्रातृद|Prātṛda]] in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 31, 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

भाल्लवि
<u>'''Bhāllavi'''</u> is the name of a school mentioned as authorities in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (ii. 2, 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

भाल्लविन्
<u>'''Bhāllavin,'''</u> ‘pupil of Bhallavin,’ is the name of a school of teachers mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_390> ii. 4, 7 (spelt Bhāllabin). ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 44;<br> 2, 100;<br> 390;<br> [[निदान|Nidāna]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], v. 1;<br> Anupada [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 1;<br> vii. 12;<br> Bṛhaddevatā v. 23. 159.</ref> 

भाल्लवेय
<u>'''Bhāllaveya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[भाल्लवि|Bhāllavi]],'''’<ref name=fx1_ve2_391> x. 6, 1, 1.</ref> is the patronymic of '''Indradyumna''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_391/> and the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_391> v. 11, 1.</ref> Probably the same person is meant by the [[भाल्लवेय|Bhāllaveya]], who is cited frequently as an authority in the same [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_391> i. 7, 3, 19;<br> ii. 1, 4, 6;<br> xiii. 4, 2, 3;<br> 5, 3, 4.</ref>

भावयव्य
<u>'''Bhāvayavya.'''</u> See '''[[भाव्य|Bhāvya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

भाव्य
<u>'''Bhāvya'''</u> is the name of a patron, as it seems, in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_393> i. 126, 1;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 10.</ref> In the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_393> xvi. 11, 5. ''Cf.'' Bṛhaddevatā, iii. 140.</ref> the form given is [[भावयव्य|Bhāvayavya]], being a patronymic of '''Svanaya,''' who is the patron of '''[[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]].''' This combination is borne out by the Rigveda, where [[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]] and Svanaya are mentioned in the same verse,<ref name=fx3_ve2_393> i. 126, 3.</ref> while Svanaya must be meant in the verse of the same hymn,<ref name=fx4_ve2_393> i. 126, 1.</ref> where [[भाव्य|Bhāvya]] is mentioned as ‘living on the Sindhu’ (Indus). Roth's<ref name=fx5_ve2_393> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 1 f.</ref> view that [[भाव्य|Bhāvya]] here is perhaps a gerundive meaning to be ‘reverenced’ is not probable. Ludwig<ref name=fx6_ve2_393> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 151.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Episches im Vedischen Ritual,'' 22;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 128.</ref> thinks Svanaya was connected with the '''Nahuṣas.'''

भाषा
<u>'''Bhāṣā'''</u> in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_394> i. 4, 5. ''Cf.'' ii. 2.</ref> and Pāṇini<ref name=fx2_ve2_394> iii. 2, 108;<br> vi. 1, 181. ''Cf.'' Franke, Bezzenberger's ''Beiträge,'' 17, 54 ''et seq.,'' who distinguishes the [[भाषा|Bhāṣā]] as the speech of conversational use from the language regulated by Pāṇini's rules. But see Wackernagel, ''Altindische Grammatik,'' 1, xliv;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 179, 180.</ref> denotes the ordinary speech of the day as opposed to Vedic language. ''Cf.'' '''[[वाच्|Vāc]].'''

भास
<u>'''Bhāsa'''</u> is the name of a bird of prey in the Adbhuta [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_395> vi. 8, See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 40.</ref> and often in the Epic. 

भिक्षा
<u>'''Bhikṣā,'''</u> ‘begging,’ is one of the duties of the '''Brahmacārin''' according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_396> xi. 3, 3, 7. ''Cf.'' a [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] in Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 9, etc.;<br> and ''bhikṣācarya,'' Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 4, 1;<br> iv. 4, 26.</ref> The word has also the sense of ‘alms,’ as that which is obtained by begging, in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_396> xi. 5, 9.</ref> According to the St. Petersburg Dictionary,<ref name=fx3_ve2_396> ''s.v.'' 2.</ref> it has this sense in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_396> viii. 8, 5, where the scholiast explains the word by ‘perfumes, garlands, food,’ etc. (''gandhamālyānnādi'').</ref> also, but the correct reading there is probably '''[[आमिक्षा|Āmikṣā]].'''

भिक्षु
<u>'''Bhikṣu,'''</u> ‘beggar,’ is a term not found in Vedic literature. The begging of the '''Brahmacārin''' is quite a different thing from the duties of the [[भिक्षु|Bhikṣu]] in the later system of the Āśramas (religious stages of life), when the Brahmin in the last stage of his life, after leaving his home and family, lives on alms alone. See 1. '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

भित्ति
<u>'''Bhitti'''</u> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_398> iii. 5, 3, 9. ''Cf.'' Sāṅkhāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 3, 24.</ref> denotes a mat made of split reeds.

भिषज्
<u>'''Bhiṣaj,'''</u> ‘physician,’ is a word of common occurrence in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_399> ii. 33, 4;<br> vi. 50, 7;<br> ix. 112, 1;<br> ''[[भेषज|bheṣaja]],'' adjective, ii. 33, 7;<br> x. 137, 6;<br> substantive, i. 23, 19. 20;<br> ii. 33, 2. 4;<br> vi. 74, 3;<br> vii. 46, 3, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_399> Av. v. 29, 1;<br> vi. 24, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 4, 9, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 5;<br> xix. 12. 88;<br> xxx. 10, etc.;<br> ''[[भेषज|bheṣaja]],'' adjective, Av. vi. 109, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 45, etc.;<br> substantive, Av. v. 29, 1;<br> vi. 21, 2;<br> xi. 1, 9, etc.</ref> There is no trace whatever in the former text of the profession being held in disrepute: the Aśvins,<ref name=fx3_ve2_399> Rv. i. 116, 16;<br> 157, 6;<br> viii. 18, 8;<br> 86, 1;<br> x. 39, 3. 5;<br> Av. vii. 53, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 18.</ref> Varuṇa,<ref name=fx4_ve2_399> See Rv. i. 24, 9.</ref> and Rudra<ref name=fx5_ve2_399> Rv. ii. 33, 4. 7.</ref> are all called physicians. On the other hand, in the [[धर्म|Dharma]] literature<ref name=fx6_ve2_399> See Āpastamba [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 6, 18, 20;<br> 19, 15;<br> [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvii. 17;<br> [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiv. 2, 19;<br> Viṣṇu, li. 10;<br> lxxxii. 9;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 1.</ref> this profession is utterly  despised. This dislike is found as early as the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx7_ve2_399> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 4, 9, 3. ''Cf.'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 6, 2;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 5, 14;<br> Bloomfield, ''op. cit.,'' xxxix, xl.</ref> where the Aśvins are condemned because of their having to do with the practice of medicine (''[[भेषज|bheṣaja]]''), on the ground that it brings them too much among men, an allusion to the caste dislike of promiscuous contact.<br><br>The Rigveda<ref name=fx8_ve2_399> x. 97.</ref> contains a hymn in which a physician celebrates his plants and their healing powers. Moreover, wonderful cures are referred to as performed by the Aśvins: the healing of the lame<ref name=fx9_ve2_399> Rv. i. 112, 8;<br> x. 39, 3, etc.</ref> and of the blind;<ref name=fx10_ve2_399> ''Cf.'' the case of [[ऋज्राश्व|Ṛjrāśva]], Rv. i. 116, 17.</ref> the rejuvenation of the aged '''[[च्यवन|Cyavana]]'''<ref name=fx11_ve2_399> Rv. x. 39, 4.</ref> and of '''Puraṃdhi's''' husband;<ref name=fx12_ve2_399> i. 116, 13.</ref> the giving of an iron leg (''jaṅghā āyasī'') to '''[[विश्पला|Viśpalā]],'''<ref name=fx13_ve2_399> Rv. i. 116, 15, etc.</ref> a deed only more wonderful if we assume that [[विश्पला|Viśpalā]] was a mare, as has been suggested by Pischel.<ref name=fx14_ve2_399> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 171 ''et seq.;<br>'' 305.</ref> It would in all probability be a mistake to assume<ref name=fx15_ve2_399> As Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 398, is inclined to do.</ref> that the Vedic Indians had any surgical skill: they no doubt applied simples to wounds,<ref name=fx16_ve2_399> ''Cf.'' Rv. ix. 112, 1.</ref> but both their medicien and their surgery must have been most primitive. All that the Atharvaveda shows in regard to medicine is the use of herbs combined with spells,<ref name=fx17_ve2_399> So it is said in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 9, 10: ''bheṣajaṃ vā Ātharvaṇāni,'' ‘the [[अथर्वन्|Atharvan]] hymns are medicine’;<br> xvi. 10, 10;<br> and ''cf. ibid.,'' xxiii. 16, 7;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 5 and 2. '''[[भिषज्|Bhiṣaj]].'''</ref> and of water (''cf.'' '''Jalāṣa'''), remedies Indo-European in character, but not of much scientific value. On the other hand, the knowledge of anatomy shown (see '''[[शरीर|Śarīra]]'''), though betraying grave inaccuracies, is not altogether insignificant; but that was due no doubt mainly to the practice of dissecting animals at the sacrifice.<br><br>There is some evidence in the Rigveda<ref name=fx18_ve2_399> ix. 112, where a profession must be meant. ''Ibid.,'' 3, refers to the fees of the physician. ''Cf.'' also x. 97, 4. 8.</ref> that the practice of medicine was already a profession; this is supported by the inclusion of a physician in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx19_ve2_399> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 10;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 4, 1.</ref> According to  Bloomfield,<ref name=fx20_ve2_399> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 456.</ref> a hymn of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx21_ve2_399> v. 30, 5. But this sense is doubtful. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 277.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 397-399;<br> Bloomfield, ''op. cit., passim'' (see references on p. 697);<br> ''Atharvaveda,'' 59 ''et seq.;<br>'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 420 ''et seq.;<br>'' Jolly, ''Medicin,'' 16, 17;<br> Winternitz, ''Nature,'' 1898, 233-235;<br> Caland, ''Altindisches Zauberritual, passim.''</ref> contains a physician's deprecation of the use of home-made remedies instead of reliance on his professional training.

भिषज् आथर्वण
<u>'''2. Bhiṣaj Ātharvaṇa'''</u> is the name of a mythic physician mentioned in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve2_400> xvi. 3 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 459). ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' xxi;<br> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 181.</ref>

भीम वैदर्भ
<u>'''Bhīma Vaidarbha'''</u> (‘prince of Vidarbha’) is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 34) as having received instruction regarding the substitute for the Soma juice, through a succession of teachers, from '''[[पर्वत|Parvata]]''' and '''[[नारद|Nārada]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

भीम-सेन
<u>'''Bhīma-sena'''</u> is the name of one of the brothers of '''[[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]],''' the '''Pārikṣitīyas,''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_402> xiii. 5, 4, 3. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 9, 3.</ref>

भुज्यु
<u>'''1. Bhujyu'''</u> denotes, according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, an ‘adder’ in two passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_403> iv. 27, 4;<br> x. 95, 8.</ref> and one of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve2_403> xviii. 42.<br><br>''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 126, who takes ''[[भुज्यु|bhujyu]]'' in Rv. x. 95, 8, as meaning ‘ardent,’ ‘rutting.’</ref> But the sense is uncertain in all these passages.

भुज्यु
<u>'''2. Bhujyu'''</u> is the name of a man, son of '''[[तुग्र|Tugra]],''' who is repeatedly mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_404> i. 112, 6, 20;<br> 116, 3;<br> 117, 14;<br> 119, 4;<br> vi. 62, 6;<br> vii. 68, 7;<br> 69, 7;<br> x. 40, 7;<br> 65, 12;<br> 143, 5.</ref> as saved from the deep by the Aśvins. According to Bühler,<ref name=fx2_ve2_404> ''Indische Palœographie,'' 17.<br><br>''Cf.'' Baunack, Kuhn's ''Zeitschrift,'' 35, 485;<br> Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 214;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 16, n. 5;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 244, 245;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 52.</ref> the passages refer to  [[भुज्यु|Bhujyu]] being saved from shipwreck during a voyage in the Indian Ocean, but the evidence is inadequate to support this conclusion. ''Cf.'' '''[[सम्उद्र|Samudra]].'''

भुज्यु लाह्यायनि
<u>'''Bhujyu Lāhyāyani'''</u> (‘descendant of Lahyāyana’) is the name of a teacher, a contemporary of '''[[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]],''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iii. 3, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

भुरिज्
<u>'''Bhurij'''</u> (used in the dual only) is a word of somewhat doubtful sense. Roth<ref name=fx1_ve2_406> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 466.</ref> regarded it as meaning in some passages<ref name=fx2_ve2_406> Rv. viii. 4, 16;<br> Av. xx. 127, 4.</ref> ‘scissors,’ and in others<ref name=fx3_ve2_406> Rv. iv. 2, 14;<br> ix. 26, 4;<br> 71, 5. where Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 239243, considers that the shafts of the chariot are meant (''cf.'' Gobhila [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 31, whence it appears that the chariot-pole, spoken of as having two arms, was forked). The same view regarding the passages cited in n. 2 gives the sense of a stropping apparatus, consisting of two pieces of wood, between which a grindstone moves.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 252, 255.</ref> an apparatus consisting of two arms used by the chariot-maker for fixing the wood at which he worked, being of the nature of a carpenter's vice. See also '''Ksura'''

भूत-विद्या
<u>'''Bhūta-vidyā'''</u> is one of the sciences enumerated in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_407> vii. 1, 2. 4;<br> 2, 1;<br> 7, 1. ''Cf.'' Little, ''Grammatical Index,'' 115.</ref> It seems to mean the ‘science of creatures’ that trouble men, and of the means of warding them off, ‘demonology.’

भूत-वीर
<u>'''Bhūta-vīra'''</u> is the name of a family of priests who, according to the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_408> vii. 27. ''Cf.'' Roth, ''Zur Litteratur und Geschichte des Weda,'' 118;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 43, 344, n. 3;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 437 ''et seq.''</ref> were employed by '''[[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]]''' to the exclusion of the '''Kaśyapas.''' A family of the latter, the '''Asitamṛgas,''' however, won back the favour of [[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]], and ousted the Bhūtavīras. 

भूतांश
<u>'''Bhūtāṃśa'''</u> is in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_409> x. 106, 11. See [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], xii, 41;<br> Bṛhaddevatā. viii. 18. 19;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 133.</ref> the name of a poet, a descendant of [[कश्यप|Kaśyapa]].

भूति
<u>'''Bhūti'''</u> is the term used in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_410> viii. 59, 7. ''Cf.'' i. 161, 1 (both late passages).</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_410> Av. ix. 6, 45;<br> x. 3, 17;<br> 6, 9;<br> xi. 7, 22;<br> 8, 21;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 1, 1;<br> 3, 5, etc.;<br> ''[[भूति|bhūti]]-kāma,'' ‘desiring prosperity,’ [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 1, 1;<br> 2, 3, 3;<br> v. 1, 9, 1, etc.</ref> for ‘prosperity.’

भूमि
<u>'''Bhūmi'''</u> or '''Bhūmī''' is a common word for ‘earth’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_411> i. 64, 5;<br> 161, 14;<br> ii. 14, 7, etc. So in x. 18, 10, ‘mother earth’ receives the remains of the dead.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_411> Av. vi. 2, 1, where it is said that the [[भूमि|Bhūmi]] is the highest of the three earths ([[पृथिवी|Pṛthivī]]);<br> xi. 7, 14, where nine earths and seas are mentioned;<br> ii. 9, 4;<br> vi. 8, 2, etc.</ref> being practically a synonym of '''[[पृथिवी|Pṛthivī]].''' It is also used of the land given by the god to the Āryan,<ref name=fx3_ve2_411> Rv. iv. 26, 2. ''Cf.'' vi. 47, 20.</ref> and of grants of land.<ref name=fx4_ve2_411> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 24;<br> 6, 2, 18.</ref>

भूमि-दुन्दुभि
<u>'''Bhūmi-dundubhi,'''</u> ‘earth drum,’ denotes a pit covered with a hide used at the Mahāvrata rite, and mentioned in the Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_412> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 9, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 5.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_412> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 19;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 1, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 277, n. 14.</ref>

भूमि-पाश
<u>'''Bhūmi-pāśa,'''</u> ‘earth net,’ is the name of a plant in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], probably some sort of creeper.<br><br>^1 xiii. 8, 1, 16. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 427, n. 1.<br>==Foot Notes==

भृगवाण
<u>'''Bhṛgavāṇa'''</u> is found in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_414> i. 120, 5.</ref> apparently<ref name=fx2_ve2_414> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' i. 4;<br> 2, 92.</ref> as a name of a man who is called '''Śobha.''' Ludwig,<ref name=fx3_ve2_414> ''Über Methode bei Interpretation,'' 4.</ref> however, thinks that his name was '''[[घोष|Ghoṣa]].''' Elsewhere the word appears as an epithet of Agni, doubtless in allusion to his cult by the '''Bhṛgus.''' 

भृगु
<u>'''Bhṛgu'''</u> is a sage of almost entirely mythical character in the Rigveda and later. He counts as a son of Varuṇa,<ref name=fx1_ve2_415> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 6, 1, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ix. 1. ''Cf.'' [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xviii. 9, 2;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 17.</ref> bearing the patronymic [[वारुणि|Vāruṇi]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_415> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 34, and n. 14. For a different form of the legend, ''cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 2, 5.</ref> In the plural the Bhṛgus are repeatedly<ref name=fx3_ve2_415> Rv. i. 58, 6;<br> 127, 7;<br> 143, 4;<br> ii. 4, 2;<br> iii. 2, 4;<br> iv. 7, 1, etc. See Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' 51. The legend of their chariot-making (Rv. iv. 16, 20;<br> x. 39, 14) may be due, as Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' suggests, to a confusion with the Ṛbhus. It may, however, be an allusion to the historic Bhṛgus, whom we find in the battle of the ten kings.</ref> alluded to as devoted to the fire cult. They are clearly<ref name=fx4_ve2_415> As shown by the legend of fire having been brought to them by [[मातरिश्वन्|Mātariśvan]], Rv. iii. 5, 10.</ref> no more than a group of ancient priests and ancestors with an eponymous [[भृगु|Bhṛgu]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_415> i. 60, 1, where, however, Roth, ''loc. cit.,'' takes the singular in a collective sense, an interpretation which may be correct, but is not necessary.</ref> in the Rigveda, except in three passages,<ref name=fx6_ve2_415> Rv. vii. 18, 6;<br> viii. 3, 9;<br> 6, 18, to which list, given by Macdonell, ''loc. cit.,'' Roth adds viii. 102, 4, ''[[और्व|Aurva]]-[[भृगु|Bhṛgu]]-vat,'' ‘like [[और्व|Aurva]] and [[भृगु|Bhṛgu]].’ ''Cf.'' the fact that the '''Aurvas,''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 33, take the place of the Bhṛgus of the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxx. 5.</ref> where they are evidently regarded as an historic family. It is not clear, however, whether they were priests or warriors: in the battle of the ten kings the Bhṛgus appear with the '''Druhyus,''' perhaps as their priests, but this is not certain.<ref name=fx7_ve2_415> In viii. 3, 9;<br> 6, 18;<br> 102, 4, the reference to a priestly family is the more natural;<br> in vii. 18, 6, warriors may be meant. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 262, n., where he cites ix. 101, 13, as perhaps denoting the same thing.</ref><br><br>In the later literature the Bhṛgus are a real family, with subdivisions like the '''Aitaśāyana,''' according to the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx8_ve2_415> xxx. 5. See n. 6.</ref> The Bhṛgus are mentioned as priests in connexion with various rites, such as the Agnisthāpana<ref name=fx9_ve2_415> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 6, 5, 2;<br> v. 6, 8, 6;<br> Av. iv. 14, 5;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 4, 1 (p. 48).</ref> and the Daśapeyakratu.<ref name=fx10_ve2_415> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 18;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 2, 5;<br> Pañcavimśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xviii. 9, 2.</ref> In many passages they are conjoined with the '''Aṅgirases.'''<ref name=fx11_ve2_415> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 1, 7, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 1, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, i. 18;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 4, 8;<br> iii. 2, 7, 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 1, 13, etc. ''Cf.'' Rv. viii. 35, 3;<br> 43, 13;<br> x. 14, 6, in the first and last of which passages the Atharvans also occur. See Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' xxvii. n. 2. Hence, in the Atharvanic ritual texts, the term ''Bhṛgvaṅgirasaḥ'' is applied to the Atharvaveda (Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 9, 10, 107 ''et seq.'').</ref> the close association of the two families is shown  by the fact that [[च्यवन|Cyavana]] is called either a [[भार्गव|Bhārgava]] or an [[आङ्गिरस|Āṅgirasa]] in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx12_ve2_415> iv. 1, 5, 1.</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx13_ve2_415> v. 19, 1.</ref> the name of [[भृगु|Bhṛgu]] is selected to exemplify the dangers incurred by the oppressors of Brahmans: the '''[[सृञ्जय|Sṛñjaya]] Vaitahavyas''' perish in consequence of an attack on [[भृगु|Bhṛgu]]. In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx14_ve2_415> ii. 20. In the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 42-44 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 204), [[भृगु|Bhṛgu]] [[वारुणि|Vāruṇi]] appears as a student. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 169-173;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 140;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 443 ''et seq.''</ref> also [[भृगु|Bhṛgu]] has this representative character. ''Cf.'' '''[[भृगवाण|Bhṛgavāṇa]]''' and '''[[भार्गव|Bhārgava]].'''

भृङ्गा
<u>'''Bhṛṅgā'''</u> is the name of a species of bee, later specified as large and black, in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_416> ix. 2, 22.</ref> and the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx2_ve2_416> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 29. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 96.</ref> which include it in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’).

भृम्य्-अश्व
<u>'''Bhṛmy-aśva'''</u> is the name of the father of '''[[मुद्गल|Mudgala]]''' in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (ix. 24).<br>==Foot Notes==

भेकुरि
<u>'''Bhekuri.'''</u> See '''[[बेकुरा|Bekurā]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

भेद
<u>'''1. Bheda,'''</u> one of the enemies of '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]]''' and the '''TṛtsuBharatas,''' was defeated by the former in the '''[[यमुना|Yamunā]]''' (Jumna),<ref name=fx1_ve2_419> Rv. vii. 18, 18. 19;<br> 33, 3;<br> 83, 4.</ref> apparently in a second conflict fought after the battle of the ten kings, in which [[सुदास्|Sudās]] successfully defended his western frontier against the confederate foes. The '''Ajas, Śigrus,''' and '''Yakṣus,''' who are mentioned as also defeated, may have been united under his leadership if he was a king; or the Bhedas may have been a separate people, as Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_419> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 12 (the word is always used in the singular).</ref> thinks. Hopkins'<ref name=fx3_ve2_419> ''India, Old and New,'' 52.</ref> opinion that the defeat was on the '''[[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]],''' [[यमुना|Yamunā]] being another  name of that stream, is most improbable; nor is the view that [[भेद|Bheda]] was one of the ten kings essential.<ref name=fx4_ve2_419> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 260 ''et seq.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 20, n.;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 126;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 319, 327.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]].'''

भेद
<u>'''2. Bheda'''</u> is mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_420> xii. 4, 49. 50.</ref> as having come to a bad end because he refused a cow (''[[वशा|vaśā]]'') to Indra when asked for it. That he is different from the preceding [[भेद|Bheda]], as Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_420> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 13.</ref> assumes, is not certain. Indeed, it may very well be that his defeat led to his being chosen as the representative of the evil end of the wicked man. Moreover, the irreligious character of [[भेद|Bheda]] may be ascribed to his being a leader of non-Āryan folk, if the '''Ajas''' and '''Śigrus,''' with whom in the Rigveda he is connected or associated were, as is possible, though by no means certain, un-Āryan tribes of totemists.<ref name=fx3_ve2_420> ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 153, who inclines to see in them totemistic tribes, but the names furnish the sole support of this conjecture. On this supposition they were probably non-Āryan. ''Cf.'' '''Aja.'''</ref>

भेषज
<u>'''1. Bheṣaja,'''</u> denoting a ‘remedial agent,’ ‘medicine,’ is often mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_421> i. 89, 4;<br> ii. 33, 2, etc.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_421> Av. v. 29, 1;<br> vi. 21, 2, etc.</ref> being also used in a figurative sense.<ref name=fx3_ve2_421> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 1, 1;<br> 5, 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 41.</ref> Plants,<ref name=fx4_ve2_421> Rv. x. 97, and ''passim'' in the Atharvaveda.</ref> waters,<ref name=fx5_ve2_421> i. 23, 19. 20;<br> 34, 6, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 4, 9, 2;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 7, etc. Possibly there is some truth in Zimmer's view, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 399, that the reference is to the beneficial effects of bathing.</ref> and spells<ref name=fx6_ve2_421> Exemplified in the medical spells of the Atharvaveda and the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].</ref> are repeatedly enumerated as medicines. Most of the medical practices of the Atharvaveda are merely examples of sympathetic magic. For example, in one hymn<ref name=fx7_ve2_421> i. 22;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 264, ''et seq.''</ref> the yellow of jaundice is entreated to pass into yellow birds. In another<ref name=fx8_ve2_421> vii. 116;<br> Bloomfield, ''op. cit.,'' 565 ''et seq.''</ref> fever is to be banished by means of a frog; for the frog, being a potent means of cooling fire<ref name=fx9_ve2_421> ''Cf.'' Rv. x. 16, 14;<br> Av. xviii. 3, 60.</ref> (because of its association with water), is regarded as analogously effective in banishing the fire of fever. See '''[[भिषज्|Bhiṣaj]].''' 

भेषज
<u>'''2. Bheṣaja'''</u> in the plural is found in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_422> xi. 6, 14.</ref> and in the Sūtras<ref name=fx2_ve2_422> Āśvalāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 7, 3;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 2, 10;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 9, 10.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' xxxi. 628.</ref> denoting the hymns of the Atharvaveda in so far as they are regarded as having ‘healing’ powers.

भैम-सेन
<u>'''Bhaima-sena,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[भीमसेन|Bhīmasena]],'''’ is the name of a man in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (iv. 6, 6).<br>==Foot Notes==

भैम-सेनि
<u>'''Bhaima-seni,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[भीमसेन|Bhīmasena]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''Divodāsa''' in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve2_424> vii. 8 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 460, 472).</ref>

भैषज्य
<u>'''Bhaiṣajya'''</u> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xii, 7. 1, 12) and the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (x. 7. 25) denotes ‘healing remedy’ or ‘medicine,’ like '''[[भेषज|Bheṣaja]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

भोग
<u>'''Bhoga'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_426> v. 29, 6;<br> vi. 75, 14 (where the '''[[हस्तघ्न|Hastaghna]],''' or ‘hand-guard,’ of the archer is compared to a snake).</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_426> Av. xi. 9, 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 4, 5. 6;<br> v. 4, 5, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiii. 4;<br> xxi. 8, etc.</ref> denotes the ‘coil’ of a serpent.

भोज
<u>'''Bhoja'''</u> in several passages of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 12. 14. 17) seems to be used as a king's title.<br>==Foot Notes==

भौज्य
<u>'''Bhaujya'''</u> in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_428> vii. 32;<br> viii. 6. 12. 14. 16.</ref> denotes the rank of a prince bearing the title of '''[[भोज|Bhoja]].'''

भौमक
<u>'''Bhaumaka'''</u> is the name of some animal in the late Adbhuta [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_429> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 40.</ref>

भौमी
<u>'''Bhaumī'''</u> is the name of an animal in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve2_430> v. 5, 18, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 99.</ref> 

भौवन
<u>'''Bhauvana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Bhuvana,’ is the patronymic of the mythical '''Viśvakarman''' in the Śatapatha (xiii. 7, 1, 15) and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] (viii. 21, 8. 10) Brāhmaṇas, and the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (x. 26).<br>==Foot Notes==

भौवायन
<u>'''Bhauvāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Bhuva,’ is the patronymic of '''Kapivana''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_432> xx. 13, 4.</ref> It is also found in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx2_ve2_432> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxii. 2 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 473);<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 4, 5;<br> and Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 54, where Kapivana is not mentioned.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15 55, 69.</ref>

भ्रातृ
<u>'''Bhrātṛ'''</u> is the common designation of ‘brother’ from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_433> i. 164, 1;<br> iv. 3, 13;<br> v. 34, 4, etc.;<br> Av. i. 14, 2;<br> ii. 13, 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 8, 4, etc.;<br> ''bhrātṛtva,'' Rv. viii. 20, 22;<br> 83, 8;<br> x. 108, 10.</ref> onwards. The word is also applied to a relation or close friend generally,<ref name=fx2_ve2_433> Bo7htlingk and Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 462.</ref> but here the persons concerned are, it should be noted, in the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_433> i. 161, 1;<br> 170, 2;<br> iii. 53, 5;<br> iv. 1, 2;<br> vi. 51, 5;<br> viii. 43, 16. ''Cf.'' Av. iv. 4, 5;<br> v. 22, 12.</ref> deities, who are brothers of one another or of the worshipper. Thus in the early literature the word has not really lost its precise sense. The derivation from the root ''bhṛ,'' ‘support,’ is probably correct, designating the brother as the support of his sister. This harmonizes with the fact that in Vedic literature the brother plays the part of protector of his sister when bereft of her father, and that maidens deprived of their brothers (''abhrātṛ'') meet an evil fate.<ref name=fx4_ve2_433> Rv. i. 124, 7;<br> iv. 5, 5;<br> Av. i. 17, 1;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 328. ''Cf.'' '''[[अयोगू|Ayogū]].'''</ref> The gradation of the relations in the home is shown by the order in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx5_ve2_433> vii. 15, 2.</ref> where father, mother, brother, and sister are successively mentioned. Strife between brothers is occasionally referred to.<ref name=fx6_ve2_433> ''Cf.'' Av. iii. 30, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 5, 3, where it is a sign of serious confusion;<br> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 11, cxlv;<br> Bloomfield ''Atharvaveda,'' 72.</ref> 

भ्रातृव्य
<u>'''Bhrātṛvya'''</u> is found in one passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_434> v. 22, 12, and perhaps x. 3, 9.</ref> where, being named with brother and sister, it must be an expression of relationship. The sense appears to be ‘(father's) brother's son,’ ‘cousin,’<ref name=fx2_ve2_434> The word is rendered ‘cousin’ by Whitney in his Translation of the Atharvaveda (x. 6, 1;<br> xv. 1, 8).</ref> this meaning alone accounting for the sense of ‘rival,’ ‘enemy,’ found elsewhere in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx3_ve2_434> ii. 18, 1;<br> viii. 10, 18. 33;<br> x. 9, 1.</ref> and repeatedly in the other Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx4_ve2_434> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 5, 9, 2, etc.;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, x. 7;<br> xxvii. 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, i. 17;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7, etc.;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 1, 21, etc.;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 13, 2. ''Cf.'' Rv. viii. 21, 13.</ref> In an undivided family the relations of cousins would easily develop into rivalry and enmity. The original meaning may, however, have been ‘nephew,’<ref name=fx5_ve2_434> Whitney, in his Translation of the Atharvaveda (ii. 18, 1), while rendering the word by ‘adversary,’ explains it in a note as meaning literally ‘nephew,’ or ‘brother's son.’</ref> as the simple etymological sense would be ‘brother's son’; but this seems not to account for the later meaning so well. The [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx6_ve2_434> xxvii. 8.</ref> prescribes the telling of a falsehood to a [[भ्रातृव्य|Bhrātṛvya]], who, further, is often given the epithets ‘hating’ (''dviṣan'') and ‘evil’ (''apriya, pāpman'') in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx7_ve2_434> See several of the passages given in n. 4.</ref> The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx8_ve2_434> ii. 18, 1;<br> x. 9, 1, etc. ''Cf.'' Tait tirīya Saṃhitā, i. 3. 2, 1, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 501, 506, 507, who thinks it means a kind of brother, and through early family conditions was restricted to cousins;<br> Bo7htlingk and Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 307.</ref> also contains various spells, which aim at destroying or expelling one's ‘rivals.’

भ्रूण-हन्
<u>'''Bhrūṇa-han,'''</u> ‘slaying an embryo’; '''Bhrūṇa-hatyā,''' ‘the slaying of an embryo,’ are terms expressing a crime which is repeatedly and severely censured in the later Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve2_435> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 9;<br> Kāthaka Sāṃhitā, xxxi. 7;<br> Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitā, xlvii (cited in Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 579, 580);<br> Av. vi. 112, 3;<br> 113, 2. The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 10, 3, and [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 8;<br> 11, have ''brahma-han'' instead;<br> but see ''ibid.,'' 12.</ref> where it is said to be the greatest of all crimes, and one of which the  guilt cannot be removed. In many later passages<ref name=fx2_ve2_435> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 9, 15, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 8, 2;<br> x. 1, 15;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 3, 22. The substantive is found in [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 20, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 7, 3;<br> 8, 3;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 1;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 18, 19;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 27. Bhrūṇa itself occurs in Rv. x. 155. 2.</ref> the same crime is referred to, always with reprobation: this fact alone shows the erroneousness of the theory<ref name=fx3_ve2_435> See '''Pati,''' p. 487, with n. 131.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 481;<br> 10, 66;<br> Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 17, 430;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 521, 522.</ref> that daughters could be allowed, once born, to die if their fathers so desired.

मकक
<u>'''Makaka,'''</u> a word occurring once in the Atharvaveda (viii. 6, 12), may be the name of some unknown animal; but it is possibly an adjective having some such sense as ‘bleating.’<br>==Foot Notes==

मकर
<u>'''Makara'''</u> is the name of an animal, probably the ‘crocodile,’<ref name=fx1_ve2_437> The [[मकर|Makara]], as a Hindu sculptural ornament, originally represented a crocodile. ''Cf.'' Cousen's article in the ''Annual Report of the Archaological Survey of India'' for 1903-4, pp. 227-231 (where the [[मकर|Makara]] appears as the vehicle of Varuṇa and of [[गङ्गा|Gaṅgā]]). ''Cf.'' also ''op. cit.,'' 1904-5, pp. 80, 83, 84.</ref> which is included in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx2_ve2_437> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 13, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 16;<br> [[वाज|Vāja]] saneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 35. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 97.</ref>

मक्ष
<u>'''Makṣa,'''</u> ‘fly,’ is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_438> iv. 45, 4;<br> vii. 32, 2.</ref> and the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_438> ix. 1, 17.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 97.</ref> where its fondness for sweet things is alluded to. ''Cf.'' '''[[अद्मसद्|Admasad]]'''

मक्षा
<u>'''Makṣā, Makṣikā,'''</u> denote both ‘fly’<ref name=fx1_ve2_439> Makṣikā, Rv. i. 162, 9;<br> Av. xi. 1, 2;<br> 9, 10;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 3, 2.</ref> and ‘bee’<ref name=fx2_ve2_439> [[मक्षा|Makṣā]], Rv. x. 40, 6;<br> Makṣikā, i. 119, 9;<br> [[प्रश्न|Praśna]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 4, where a ‘king bee’ (''madhukara-[[राजन्|rājan]]'') is referred to.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 97;<br> Hillebrandt. ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 240, n. 1.</ref> in the Rigveda and later. 

मख
<u>'''Makha'''</u> appears to designate a person in two passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_440> ix. 101, 13, where the '''Bhṛgus''' are mentioned as opposed to [[मख|Makha]] (''cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 51);<br> x. 171, 2.</ref> but in neither passage does the context explain who he was. Probably a demon of some kind is meant. In the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx2_ve2_440> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xi. 57;<br> xxxvii. 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 1, 8, 1;<br> iii. 2, 4, 1.</ref> mention is also made of the ‘head of [[मख|Makha]],’ an expression which has become unintelligible to the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx3_ve2_440> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1, 2, 17. ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref>

मगध
<u>'''Magadha'''</u> is the name of a people who appear throughout Vedic literature as of little repute. Though the name is not actually found in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_441> See '''Kikaṭa.'''</ref> it occurs in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_441> v. 22, 14, where the Paippalāda recension has ''mayebhiḥ,'' which is a mere blunder, but substitutes the '''Kāśis''' for the Aṅgas.</ref> where fever is wished away to the '''Gandhāṛis''' and '''Mūjavants,''' northern peoples, and to the '''Aṅgas''' and Magadhas, peoples of the east. Again, in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_441> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 5, 22;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 1, 1.</ref> the [[मागध|Māgadha]], or man of [[मगध|Magadha]], is included as dedicated to ''ati-kruṣṭa,'' ‘loud noise’(?), while in the '''[[व्रात्य|Vrātya]]''' hymn of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx4_ve2_441> xv. 2, 1-4.</ref> the [[मागध|Māgadha]] is said to be connected with the [[व्रात्य|Vrātya]] as his [[मित्र|Mitra]], his [[मन्त्र|Mantra]], his laughter, and his thunder in the four quarters. In the Śrauta Sūtras<ref name=fx5_ve2_441> Lāṭyāyar Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 6, 28;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxii. 4, 22. ''Cf.'' Sāyaṇa on [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 1, 16. 17.</ref> the equipment characteristic of the [[व्रात्य|Vrātya]] is said to be given, when the latter is admitted into the Āryan Brahminical community, to a bad Brahmin living in [[मगध|Magadha]] (''[[ब्रह्म-बन्धु|brahma-bandhu]] [[मागध-देशीय|Māgadha-deśīya]]''), but this point does not occur in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx6_ve2_441> xvii. 1, 16.</ref> On the other hand, respectable Brahmins sometimes lived there, for the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx7_ve2_441> vii. 13;<br> this is not mentioned in the earlier [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka.</ref> mentions '''Madhyama, Prātībodhī-[[पुत्र|putra]],''' as ''[[मगध|Magadha]]-vāsin,'' ‘living in [[मगध|Magadha]].’ Oldenberg,<ref name=fx8_ve2_441> ''Buddha,'' 400, n.;<br> Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 112, n.</ref> however, seems clearly right in regarding this as unusual. <br><br>The Magadhas are evidently a people in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] and other Sūtras,<ref name=fx9_ve2_441> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 2, 13;<br> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xx. 13;<br> Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxii. 6, 18;<br> Hiraṇyakeśi Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvii. 6. See Caland, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Mergenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 56, 553.</ref> possibly also in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx10_ve2_441> ii. 1, 1. See Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 200;<br> ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 46, n. 4.</ref> It is therefore most improbable that Zimmer<ref name=fx11_ve2_441> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 35. ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' 20.</ref> can be right in thinking that in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_441/> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx4_ve2_441/> the [[मागध|Māgadha]] is not a man of [[मगध|Magadha]], but a member of the mixed caste produced by a '''[[वैश्य|Vaiśya]]''' marrying a '''[[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]''' woman.<ref name=fx12_ve2_441> Manu, x. 11;<br> [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]. iv. 17. So Sāyaṇa, on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.,'' explains [[मागध|Māgadha]], and Mahīdhara, on the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, offers this as one version.</ref> But the theory of mixed castes, in any case open to some doubt, cannot be accepted when used to explain such obviously tribal names as [[मागध|Māgadha]]. The fact that the [[मागध|Māgadha]] is often in later times a minstrel is easily accounted for by the assumption that the country was the home of minstrelsy and that wandering bards from [[मगध|Magadha]] were apt to visit the more western lands. This class the later texts recognize as a caste, inventing an origin by intermarriage of the old-established castes.<br><br>The dislike of the Magadhas, which may be Rigvedic, since the '''Kīkaṭas''' were perhaps the prototype of the Magadhas, was in all probability due, as Oldenberg<ref name=fx13_ve2_441> ''Buddha,'' 400, n.</ref> thinks, to the fact that the Magadhas were not really Brahminized. This is entirely in accord with the evidence of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx14_ve2_441> i. 4, 1, 10 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 170 ''et seq.;<br>'' Oldenberg, ''op. cit.,'' 398. [[कोसल|Kosala]] here appears as more Brahminical than [[विदेह|Videha]];<br> it is interesting to note that, while [[वैदेह|Vaideha]], like [[मागध|Māgadha]], is used in the later theory as a name of a mixed caste, [[कौसल्य|Kausalya]] is not so degraded (Oldenberg, 399, n.).</ref> that neither '''[[कोसल|Kosala]]''' nor '''[[विदेह|Videha]]''' were fully Brahminized at an early date, much less [[मगध|Magadha]]. Weber<ref name=fx15_ve2_441> See ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 52, 53;<br> 185;<br> 10, 99;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 79, n. 1;<br> 111, 112.</ref> suggests two other grounds that may have influenced the position--the persistence of aboriginal blood and the growth of Buddhism. The latter consideration is hardly applicable to the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] or the Atharvaveda; but the imperfect Brahminization of the land, if substituted for it in accordance with Oldenberg's suggestion,  would have some force. The former motive, despite Oldenberg's doubt, seems fully justified. Pargiter<ref name=fx16_ve2_441> ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, pp. 851-853.<br><br>''Cf.'' Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 6, 24, 260, 267.</ref> has gone so far as to suggest that in [[मगध|Magadha]] the Āryans met and mingled with a body of invaders from the east by sea. Though there is no evidence for this view in the Vedic texts, it is reasonable to suppose that the farther east the Āryans penetrated, the less did they impress themselves upon the aborigines. Modern ethnology confirms this ''a priori'' supposition in so far as it shows Āryan types growing less and less marked as the eastern part of India is reached, although such evidence is not decisive in view of the great intermixture of peoples in India.

मगुन्दी
<u>'''Magundī'''</u> is the name of some pest occurring in a verse of an Atharvaveda hymn<ref name=fx1_ve2_442> ii. 14, 2.</ref> employed to exorcise evil influences. By that verse the ‘daughters of the Magundī’ are to be expelled from the cowstall, the wagon, and the house. It is uncertain whether an animal, insect, or demoness is meant.<ref name=fx2_ve2_442> ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 58.</ref>

मघ
<u>'''Magha'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_443> i. 11, 3;<br> 104, 5;<br> iii. 13, 3;<br> 19, 1;<br> iv. 17, 8;<br> v. 30, 12;<br> 32, 12, etc.;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 16. Very rarely later, ''e.g.,'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xx. 67.</ref> denotes ‘bounty,’ and Maghavan<ref name=fx2_ve2_443> Rv. i. 31, 12;<br> ii. 6, 4;<br> 27, 17;<br> v. 39, 4;<br> 42, 8;<br> vi. 27, 8, etc. So [[मघ|Magha]]-tti, ‘giving of gifts,’ Rv. iv. 37, 8;<br> v. 79, 5;<br> viii. 24, 10, etc.;<br> Maghadeya, ‘giving of gifts,’ vii. 67, 9;<br> x. 156, 2;<br> Maghavat-tva, ‘liberality,’ vi. 27, 3. The word Maghavan is the epithet ''par excellence'' of Indra in the Rv. (iii. 30, 3;<br> iv. 16, 1;<br> 31, 7;<br> 42, 5, etc.), and survives in post-Vedic literature as a name of Indra;<br> otherwise, even in the later Saṃhitās, it is very rare, occurring practically as a divine epithet only (of Indra, [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 4, 8, 1;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 3, 13;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 11).</ref> is the regular Vedic name for the ‘generous giver’ of bounties to priests. It is doubtful whether the Maghavans were more than this, or had any special rank as a class in Vedic society. See '''[[सभा|Sabhā]].'''

मघा
<u>'''Maghā.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]]''' and '''[[अघा|Aghā]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

मङ्गल
<u>'''Maṅgala'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xxvi. 2). <br>==Foot Notes==

मङ्गीर
<u>'''Maṅgīra'''</u> is found in an obscure verse in the Vaitāna<ref name=fx1_ve2_446> xxxiv. 9.</ref> and other<ref name=fx2_ve2_446> [[मानव|Mānava]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vii. 2, 7;<br> ''Mandīrasya,'' Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 3, 21;<br> ''Maṅkīrasya,'' Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxi. 20, 3.</ref> Sūtras with reference to cows. It is quite uncertain whether a river or a man<ref name=fx3_ve2_446> So apparently Garbe, Translation of the Vaitāna [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 97;<br> Caland. ''Das Vaitānasūtra,'' 102;<br> Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> is meant. The [[गङ्गा|Gaṅgā]] (Ganges) and the [[यमुना|Yamunā]] (Jumna) are mentioned in the same verse. The correct form of the word is doubtful.<ref name=fx4_ve2_446> See the variants in n. 2.</ref>

मञ्जिष्ठा
<u>'''Mañjiṣṭhā,'''</u> ‘madder,’ is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] (iii. 2, 4) and [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] (viii. 7) Āraṇyakas.<br>==Foot Notes==

मटची
<u>'''Maṭacī'''</u> occurs in a passage of the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_448> i. 10, 1.</ref> where reference is made to the '''Kurus''' being overwhelmed by Maṭacīs.<ref name=fx2_ve2_448> ''[[मटची|Maṭacī]]-hata.''</ref> Śaṅkara interprets the word by ‘thunderbolts’ (''aśanayaḥ''), while Ānandatīrtha in his commentary gives, as an alternative rendering, ''pāṣāṇa-vṛṣṭayaḥ--i.e.,'' ‘hailstones,’ which may be the sense. The Śabdakalpadruma,<ref name=fx3_ve2_448> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> agreeing with Ānandatīrtha,<ref name=fx4_ve2_448> On Brahmasūtra, iii. 4, 28.</ref> says that [[मटची|Maṭacī]] means, ‘a kind of small red bird’ (''rakta-[[वर्ण|varṇa]]-kṣudra-pakṣi-viśeṣa,'' reading ''-pakṣī-''), and Jacob<ref name=fx5_ve2_448> ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1911, p. 510.</ref> suggests that the ‘locust’ is meant.

मणि
<u>'''Maṇi'''</u> is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_449> i. 33, 8.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_449> Av. i. 29, 1;<br> ii. 4, 1, 2;<br> viii. 5, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' x. 6, 24;<br> xii. 1, 44;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 3, 4, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxv. 15;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 6;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vii. 23, where [[दुर्ग|Durga]], in his commentary, takes [[मणि|Maṇi]] as ''āditya-[[मणि|maṇi]],'' or ‘sun-stone,’ while the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' suggests that a crystal used as a burning glass may be meant.</ref> of a ‘jewel’ used as an amulet against all kinds of evil. That either ‘pearl’<ref name=fx3_ve2_449> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> or ‘diamond’<ref name=fx4_ve2_449> ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben'' 53.</ref> is denoted is not clear.<ref name=fx5_ve2_449> The expression ''[[हिरण्य|hiraṇya]] [[मणि|maṇi]]'' in Rv i. 33, 8, might possibly mean ‘gold a an ornament,’ but ‘gold (and) jewels is more probable. ''Cf.'' Av. xii. 1, 44, where ''maṇiṃ hiraṇyam'' must mean a jewel (and) gold.’</ref> It is evident that the  [[मणि|Maṇi]] could be strung on a thread (''[[सूत्र|sūtra]]''), which is referred to in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx6_ve2_449> xx. 16, 6.</ref> and elsewhere;<ref name=fx7_ve2_449> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 18, 8. ''Cf.'' iii. 4, 13;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 248;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 3, 4, 2.</ref> the [[मणि|Maṇi]] was certainly also worn round the neck, for in the Rigveda<ref name=fx8_ve2_449> i. 122, 14.</ref> occurs the epithet ''[[मणि|maṇi]]-grīva,'' ‘having a jewel on the neck.’ An amulet of [[बिल्व|Bilva]] is celebrated in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx9_ve2_449> xii. 18 ''et seq.''</ref> and many varieties of amulet are there enumerated.<ref name=fx10_ve2_449> xii. 8.</ref> The ‘jeweller’ (''[[मणि|maṇi]]-kāra'') is mentioned in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx11_ve2_449> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 3, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 337;<br> Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 253;<br> Weber, ''Omina und Portenta,'' 317, 374;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 2, 2, n. 4;<br> 5, 386;<br> 18, 37;<br> ''Proceedings of the Berlin Academy,'' 1891, 796. Weber is inclined to detect a Babylonian origin of [[मणि|Maṇi]] (''cf.'' '''[[मना|Manā]]'''), but the evidence is not convincing.</ref>

मणिक
<u>'''Maṇika'''</u> in the late Adbhuta [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_450> Weber, ''Omina und Portenta,'' 316.</ref> and the Sūtras<ref name=fx2_ve2_450> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 9, 3;<br> iv. 6, 4;<br> Gobhila [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 1, 26;<br> iii. 9, 6. 7, etc.;<br> Sāṅkhāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 14.</ref> denotes a large ‘water bottle.’

मण्ड
<u>'''Maṇḍa,'''</u> n., is found in the compound ''nau-[[मण्ड|maṇḍa]]'' (du.), denoting the two ‘rudders’ of a ship in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_451> ii. 3, 3, 15. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 345, n. 3, who, following the commentary, accepts ‘sides’ as the meaning;<br> Caland, ''Über das rituelle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 60.</ref>

मण्डूक
<u>'''Maṇḍūka'''</u> is the name of ‘frog’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_452> vii. 103, 1;<br> x. 166, 5.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_452> Av. vii. 112, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 4, 4, 3;<br> 7, 11, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiii. 1;<br> xxi. 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 36;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 4, 16;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 1, 2, 20 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 5.</ref> the feminine Maṇḍūkī also occurring.<ref name=fx3_ve2_452> Rv. x. 16, 14;<br> Av. xviii. 3, 60;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvii. 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 6, 1, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 17;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 10, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, vi. 4, 1.</ref> The famous frog hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve2_452> vii. 103. ''Cf.'' Av. iv. 15, 12, as explained by Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 223, where reference is made to frogs in the clefts of the earth ([[इरिण|Iriṇa]]).</ref> compares with Brahmins the frogs croaking  as they awake to activity at the beginning of the rains. It has been explained by Max Müller<ref name=fx5_ve2_452> ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 494, 495.</ref> as a satire on the Brahmins. Geldner,<ref name=fx6_ve2_452> ''Rigveda, Kommentar,'' 117.</ref> agreeing with this view, thinks that it is directed by its '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]]''' composer against rival Brahmins, probably the '''Viśvāmitras.'''<ref name=fx7_ve2_452> Geldner, ''loc. cit.,'' very plausibly points out that the last [[पाद|Pāda]] of this [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] hymn is borrowed from the most important [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] hymn (Rv. iii. 53, 7).</ref> The view, however, which interprets the hymn as a rain charm<ref name=fx8_ve2_452> [[यास्क|Yāska]], ''[[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],'' ix. 5;<br> Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 173-179. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 151;<br> ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 121, 122.</ref> seems on the whole more likely. The frog, from its connexion with water, was considered to have cooling properties. Thus after the burning of the dead body the frog is invited to come to the spot where the cremation has taken place in order to cool it down.<ref name=fx9_ve2_452> Rv. x. 16, 14. See Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 11, 342350;<br> Lanman in Whitney's Translation of the Atharvaveda, 850.</ref> Similarly the frog is invoked in the Atharvaveda against the fire of fever.<ref name=fx10_ve2_452> Av. vii. 116. See Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 565.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 95.</ref>

मत्स्य
<u>'''1. Matsya,'''</u> ‘fish,’ is mentioned only once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_453> x. 68, 8.</ref> but frequently later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_453> Av. xi. 2, 25;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 9, 5;<br> 14, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 21, 34;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 6, 1;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 1, 1 (the famous fish of the deluge legend);<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 4, 3;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 2;<br> ''[[महा-मत्स्य|mahā-matsya]],'' ‘great fish,’ Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 3, 18. In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 3, 12 (''cf.'' Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 7, 8;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 2, 23), a [[मत्स्य|Matsya]] [[सांमद|Sāṃmada]] is personfied as the king of the fishes.</ref>

मत्स्य
<u>'''2. Matsya'''</u> appears to be the name of a people in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_454> vii. 18, 6.</ref> where they are ranged with the other enemies of '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]],''' although it is possible to see merely the sense of ‘fish’ in that passage. In the list of Aśvamedhins, ‘offerers of the horse sacrifice,’ in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_454> xiii. 5, 4, 9.</ref> '''[[ध्वसन् द्वैतवन|Dhvasan Dvaitavana]]''' is mentioned as a [[मत्स्य|Matsya]] king ('''[[मात्स्य|Mātsya]]'''). The Matsyas as a people occur also in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_454> iv. 1.</ref> in  connexion with the '''Vaśas,'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_454> This is the most probable reading, which results from a comparison with Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 9, where ''[[शाल्व|Śālva]]-Matsyeṣu'' is followed by ''savaśaUśīnareṣu'' (misprinted ''śavaśa-''). See Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 367. The older view was ''SatvanMatsyeṣu,'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 1, lxxvii, following Cowell;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. [[सत्वन्त्|Satvant]].''</ref> and in the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_454> i. 2, 9.</ref> in connexion with '''Śālvas.''' In Manu<ref name=fx6_ve2_454> ii. 19;<br> vii. 193.</ref> the '''[[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]],''' the Matsyas, the '''Pancālas,''' and the '''Śūrasenakas''' comprise the land of the Brahmin [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]] (''[[ब्रह्मर्षि-देश|brahmarṣi-deśa]]''). There is no reason to doubt that the Matsyas occupied much the same territory as in Epic times, say Alwar, Jaipur, Bharatpur.<ref name=fx7_ve2_454> See Vincent Smith, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 56, 675.<br><br>''Cf.'' von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 166;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 211;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 127.</ref>

मदा-वती
<u>'''Madā-vatī,'''</u> ‘intoxicating,’ is the name of a plant in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_455> vi. 16, 2;<br> ''cf.'' iv. 7, 4. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 292;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 465;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 72.</ref>

मदुघ
<u>'''Madugha,'''</u> ‘honey-plant,’<ref name=fx1_ve2_456> The literal meaning is probably ‘yielding honey,’ the word being, according to the commentator, derived from ''[[मधु|madhu]]-dugha,'' a word actually occurring in the Rigveda (vi. 70, 1. 5).</ref> is the name of a sweet herb in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_456> i. 34, 4;<br> vi. 102, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 386, n.;<br> 404;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 34, 35, 355;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 275;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 69.</ref> The spelling is somewhat uncertain, since many manuscripts read Madhugha.<ref name=fx3_ve2_456> These two forms probably stand by haplology for ''ma[dhu]-dugha'' and ''[[मधु|madhu]]-[du]gha. Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' 64, 1''a.''</ref>

मद्गु
<u>'''Madgu,'''</u> ‘diver’ (from the root ''majj,''<ref name=fx1_ve2_457> See Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' 38''c;<br>'' 44''a'' 3''a''.</ref> ‘dive’), is the name of some aquatic bird which is included in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx2_ve2_457> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 20, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 22. 34.</ref> and is occasionally mentioned elsewhere.<ref name=fx3_ve2_457> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 8, 1. 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 93.</ref> 

मद्य
<u>'''Madya,'''</u> ‘intoxicating liquor,’ is not mentioned until the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_458> v. 11, 5. The word is found in the Epic and often in the Dharmaśāstras, as well as in medical texts.</ref> where it occurs in the compound ''[[मद्य|madya]]-pā,'' ‘drinking intoxicating liquor.’

मद्र
<u>'''Madra'''</u> denotes a people who are mentioned in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]];<ref name=fx1_ve2_459> iii. 3, 1;<br> 7, 1</ref> '''[[काप्य|Kāpya]] Patañcala''' was then living among them. Their name appears elsewhere in Vedic literature, only in that of a branch, the '''Uttara Madras,''' the ‘northern Madras,’ who are referred to in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_459> viii. 14, 3</ref> as living beyond the Himālaya (''pareṇa Himavantam'') in the neighbourhood of the '''Uttara Kurus,''' probably, as Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve2_459> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 102.</ref> conjectures, in the land of Kaśmīr. The Madras mentioned in the [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] were, like the '''Kurus,''' probably settled somewhere in '''[[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]]''' in the '''[[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]]''' or ‘Middle Land.’ ''Cf.'' '''Madragāra.'''

मद्र-गार शौङ्गायनि
<u>'''Madra-gāra Śauṅgāyani'''</u> (‘descendant of Śuṅga’) is the name of a teacher, whose pupil was '''[[काम्बोज|Kāmboja]] [[औपमन्यव|Aupamanyava]]''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_460> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref> Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve2_460> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 102.</ref> concludes, with probability, that these names point to a connexion of the Kambojas and the Madras.

मधु
<u>'''Madhu'''</u> denotes anything sweet used as food, and especially drink, ‘mead,’<ref name=fx1_ve2_461> The word is etymologically identical with Greek , ‘intoxicating drink,’ and Anglo-Saxon ''medu,'' ‘mead.’</ref> a sense often found in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_461> Used as an adjective, ‘sweet,’ in Rv. i. 90, 6. 8;<br> 187, 2;<br> iii. 1, 8;<br> iv. 34, 2;<br> 42, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxviii. 10, etc.;<br> as a substantive, Rv. i. 154, 4;<br> ii. 37, 5;<br> iii. 39, 6;<br> iv. 38, 10, etc.;<br> Av. vi. 69, 1;<br> ix. 1, 22;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 2, 4, 13, etc.</ref> More precisely it denotes either ‘Soma’<ref name=fx3_ve2_461> Rv. i. 19, 9;<br> ii. 19, 2;<br> 34, 5;<br> 36, 4;<br> iii. 43, 3;<br> iv. 18, 13, etc.</ref> or ‘milk,’<ref name=fx4_ve2_461> Rv. i. 117, 6;<br> 169, 4;<br> 177, 3;<br> iii. 8, 1;<br> vii. 24, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vi. 2, etc.</ref> or less often  ‘honey,’<ref name=fx5_ve2_461> Rv. viii. 4, 8 (where the sense is made certain by the adjective ''sāragha,'' ‘derived from the bee’);<br> perhaps also iv. 45, 4;<br> vii. 32, 2;<br> viii. 24, 20, and, according to Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 239 ''et seq.,'' in many other passages;<br> Av. ix. 1, 17, 19;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 10, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 9, 7;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 15;<br> viii. 5. 20;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 2, 1. 2;<br> xi. 5, 4, 18;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka, ii. 5, 1;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 9, 1, etc.</ref> which, however, is the most definite sense in the later literature. Taboos against the use of honey are recorded.<ref name=fx6_ve2_461> In the case of women, Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 55, 2;<br> of students, Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 4, 18.<br><br>''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 321;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref>

मधुक पैङ्ग्य
<u>'''Madhuka Paiṅgya'''</u> (‘descendant of Piṅga’) is the name of a teacher mentioned in the Śatapatha<ref name=fx1_ve2_462> xi. 7, 2, 8;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 3, 17. 18 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 3, 8 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> and the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_462> xvi. 9.</ref> Brāhmaṇas.

मधु-कशा
<u>'''Madhu-kaśā,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_463> Rv. i. 22, 3;<br> 157, 4, Av. x. 7, 19;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxi. 10, 12.</ref> or '''Madhoḥ Kasā,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_463> Av. ix. 1, 5.</ref> is the name in the Rigveda of the Aśvins’ ‘honey-whip,’ by which they impart sweetness to the sacrifice. Roth<ref name=fx3_ve2_463> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> ingeniously conjectures that the idea was derived from an instrument provided with thongs for whipping milk, a ‘milk-whip.’

मधु-कृत्
<u>'''Madhu-kṛt,'''</u> ‘honey-maker,’ denotes ‘bee’ in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_464> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i, 5, 6, 5;<br> iv. 2, 9, 6, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_464> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 10, 10, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 2, 1. 2;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 1, 2;<br> vi. 9, 1, etc.</ref>

मधु-छन्दस्
<u>'''Madhu-chandas,'''</u> the reputed author of the first ten hymns of the first Maṇḍala of the Rigveda, is mentioned as a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_465> xxviii. 2.</ref> and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx2_ve2_465> i. 1, 3.</ref> In the  [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_465> vii. 17, 7;<br> 18, 1;<br> ''cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 26, 1 ''et seq. Cf.'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 167.</ref> he counts as the fifty-first son of '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]],''' and his Praüga (hymn at the morning service) is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_465> xiii. 5, 1, 8.</ref>

मधु-ब्राह्मण
<u>'''Madhu-brāhmaṇa,'''</u> ‘the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] of the Honey,’ is the designation of a certain mystical doctrine in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_466> iv. 1, 5, 18;<br> xiv. 1, 4, 13;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 5, 16. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 290.</ref>

मध्य-देश
<u>'''Madhya-deśa,'''</u> the ‘Middle Country,’ is, according to the [[मानव|Mānava]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] Śāstra,<ref name=fx1_ve2_467> ii. 21.</ref> the land between the Himālaya in the north, the Vindhya in the south, '''[[विनशन|Vinaśana]]''' in the west, and Prayāga (now Allahabad) in the east--that is, between the place where the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]''' disappears in the desert, and the point of the confluence of the '''[[यमुना|Yamunā]]''' (Jumna) and the '''[[गङ्गा|Gaṅgā]]''' (Ganges). The same authority<ref name=fx2_ve2_467> ii. 19.</ref> defines [[ब्रह्मर्षि-देश|Brahmarṣi-deśa]] as denoting the land of '''[[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]],''' the '''Matsyas, Pañcālas,''' and '''Śūrasenakas,''' and [[ब्रह्मावर्त|Brahmāvarta]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_467> ii. 17. 19.</ref> as meaning the particularly holy land between the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] and the '''[[दृषद्वती|Dṛṣadvatī]].''' The [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_467> i. 2, 9;<br> [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 8.</ref> defines Āryāvarta as the land east of [[विनशन|Vinaśana]]; west of the Kālaka-vana, ‘Black Forest,’ or rather Kanakhala, near Hardvār; south of the Himālaya; and north of the Pāriyātra or the Pāripātra Mountains; adding that, in the opinion of others,<ref name=fx5_ve2_467> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]], i. 2, 10;<br> [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]], i. 12. See on Kanakhala, Hultzsch, ''Indian Antiquary,'' 34, 179.</ref> it was confined to the country between the [[यमुना|Yamunā]] and the [[गङ्गा|Gaṅgā]], while the '''Bhāllavins'''<ref name=fx6_ve2_467> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]], i. 2, 11. 12;<br> [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]], i. 14. 15, quoting in each case a verse of the [[निदान|Nidāna]] (what work is referred to is not certain;<br> there is similar doubt as to the quotation in the [[निदान|Nidāna]] of the [[भाल्लवि|Bhāllavi]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], according to the Bṛhaddevatā, v. 23, where see Macdonell's note, and ''cf.'' Bühler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 14, 3, n.).</ref> took it as the country between the boundary-river (or perhaps the [[सरस्|Saras]]-  vatī)<ref name=fx7_ve2_467> The readings are doubtful, varying between ''sindhur vidhāraṇī'' or ''vidharaṇī'' and ''sindhur vicaraṇī'' or ''visavaṇī.'' The latter expression must refer to the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]];<br> the former may, but not necessarily. Conceivably the [[सिन्धु|Sindhu]] (Indus) is meant;<br> for it was a great boundary, with Āryan tribes to the east of it.</ref> and the region where the sun rises. The [[मानव|Mānava]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] Śāstra,<ref name=fx8_ve2_467> ii. 22.</ref> in accord with the [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx9_ve2_467> i. 9.</ref> defines Āryāvarta as the region between the Vindhya and the Himālaya, the two ranges which seem to be the boundaries of the Āryan world in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] also.<ref name=fx10_ve2_467> ii. 13. ''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 28, n. 1.</ref><br><br>The term [[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]] is not Vedic, but it is represented in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx11_ve2_467> viii. 14, 3. The Uśīnaras may be recognized as in the north, for the Buddhist texts give Usīragiri as the northern boundary of the middle country. See Hultzsch, ''Indian Antiquary,'' 34, 179.</ref> by the expression ''madhyamā [[प्रतिष्ठा|pratiṣṭhā]] [[दिश्|diś]],'' ‘the middle fixed region,’ the inhabitants of which are stated to be the Kurus, the Pañcālas, the '''Vaśas,''' and the '''Uśīnaras.''' The latter two peoples practically disappear later on, the [[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]] being the country of the Kuru-Pañcālas, the land where the Brāhmaṇas and the later Saṃhitās were produced, bounded on the east by the '''[[कोसल|Kosala]]-Videhas,''' and on the west by the desert. The western tribes are mentioned with disapproval both in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx12_ve2_467> ix. 3, 1, 8.</ref> and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx13_ve2_467> iii. 44, 3;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 245.</ref> while the tradition of the Brahminization of the Kosalas and the Videhas from the Kuru-[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]] country is preserved in the former [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx14_ve2_467> i. 4, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bühler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 14, 2, 3;<br> 146, 147, who points out that the Pāripātra Mountains are a part of the Vindhya range in Mālvā, and who suggests that the western boundary was originally the [[आदर्श|Ādarśa]] Mountains;<br> for the reading of the manuscripts, and of the scholiast Kṛṣṇapaṇḍita, in the [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 8, is ''prāg ādarśanāt,'' not ''adarśanāt'' (corresponding with the [[विनशन|Vinaśana]] of [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 2, 9), and the Mahābhāṣya on Pāṇini, ii. 4, 10, has ''prāg ādarśāt.'' See also for the Buddhist ‘Middle Country’ an article by Rhys Davids, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1904, 83 ''et seq.,'' with Fleet's corrections, ''ibid.,'' 1907, 657;<br> and ''cf.'' Keith, ''ibid.,'' 1908, 1143;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 58, 59;<br> ''Indian Empire,'' 1, 303, 304, where the extraordinary theory is adopted that the [[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]] was peopled by a new race of immigrant Āryans, who, travelling viâ Chitral and Gilgit, and bringing no women with them, married Dravidian women, and produced the so-called Āryo-Dravidians. It is quite impossible to find any support for this theory in Vedic literature. To say, as is there said, that the ‘Vedic hymns contain no reference to the route by which the Āryans entered India or to their earlier settlements on the Indus,’ and that this is explained by the theory of the entry of the Vedic Indians viâ Chitral, is to assert absurdities. The theory is based on the later dialects and their affinities (see Grierson, ''Indian Empire,'' 1, 357 ''et seq.'');<br> it can probably not be regarded as at all valid for any period--at any rate, it is not cogent for the eighth century, B.C.</ref> 

मध्यं-दिन
<u>'''Madhyaṃ-dina,'''</u> ‘mid-day,’ is a frequent designation of time in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_468> iv. 28, 3;<br> viii. 1, 29;<br> 13, 13;<br> 27, 19;<br> x. 151, 5, etc.</ref> the later Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx2_ve2_468> Av. ix. 6, 46;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 5, 4, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx3_ve2_468> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xv. 9, 16;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 3, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 3, 9;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 9, 6;<br> 14, 1, etc. The word is sometimes used as an abbreviation for the ‘midday libation’ (like ''mittag'' in German for ‘midday meal’) in [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 10, 2, 5;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxix. 8.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Ahan.'''

मध्यम-वह्
<u>'''Madhyama-vah'''</u> occurs in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_469> ii. 29, 4.</ref> as an epithet of the chariot. The exact interpretation is doubtful. Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_469> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 210. The context seems to require the sense of ‘keeping away’ from the sacrifice.<br><br>''Cf.'' '''[[पूर्ववह्|Pūrvavah]].'''</ref> assigns to it the expression the sense of ‘driving with a single horse between the shafts.’ According to Sāyana's explanation, it means ‘driving with middling speed.’ It might mean ‘driving in the middle’--that is, ‘only half-way.’^3

मध्यम-शी
<u>'''Madhyama-śī'''</u> is found in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_470> x. 97, 12 = Av. iv. 9, 4 = Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xii. 86.</ref> where Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_470> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> assigns to the word the meaning of ''intercessor,'' which Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve2_470> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 180. ''Cf.'' '''[[धर्म|Dharma]].'''</ref> accepts, in the sense of ‘mediator’ or ‘arbiter,’ as a legal term, but which Roth may, as Lanman<ref name=fx4_ve2_470> In Whitney's Translation of the Atharvaveda, 159. But see Roth, ''Siebenzig Lieder,'' 174, which Lanman may have overlooked, since he does not refer to it.</ref> suggests, have intended to express ‘adversary’ or ‘preventer’ of the disease referred to in the hymn. Whitney<ref name=fx5_ve2_470> ''Loc. cit.''</ref> thinks that it means ‘mid-  most man’ or ‘chief’ as the one round whom his followers encamp.<ref name=fx6_ve2_470> ''Madhyamaśivan,'' in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 408, is obscure.</ref> Geldner,<ref name=fx7_ve2_470> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 131;<br> ''Kommentar,'' 196 (where he seems to decide in favour of derivation from ''śī,'' not ''śṛ'').</ref> however, thinks that a third king, who is ‘neutral’ between two enemies, is intended.

मध्यम-स्थ
<u>'''Madhyama-stha,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_471> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxvii. 5.</ref> '''Madhyame-ṣṭha,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_471> Av. iii. 8, 2, and ''cf. Madhyamastheya,'' ‘position of chief,’ [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 4, 5, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 96.</ref> in the later Saṃhitās denotes the chief in his relation to his followers ''([[सजात|sajāta]]). Cf.'' '''[[मध्यमशी|Madhyamaśī]].'''

मध्या-वर्ष
<u>'''Madhyā-varṣa,'''</u> the ‘middle of the rains,’ is specially mentioned as a time of the year in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_472> i. 3.</ref> and in the Sūtras.<ref name=fx2_ve2_472> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 5, 5. 7, etc.</ref>

मनस
<u>'''Manasa,'''</u> occurring in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_473> v. 44, 10. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 139.</ref> seems clearly to be the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]], in accordance with Sāyaṇa's interpretation.

मना
<u>'''Manā'''</u> is found in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_474> viii. 78, 2.</ref> in an enumeration of gifts, where it is described as ‘golden’ (''sacā [[मना|manā]] hiraṇyayā''). It therefore seems to designate some ornament, or possibly a weight, and has accordingly been compared<ref name=fx2_ve2_474> As. ''e.g.,'' by Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 50, 51;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 386;<br> 17, 202, 203;<br> Wackernagel, ''Altindische Grammatik,'' 1, xxii;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 278.</ref> with the Greek  (Herodotus has ), the Latin ''mina.'' All three words have been considered Semitic in origin, as borrowed from the Phœnicians<ref name=fx3_ve2_474> Or perhaps from Babylon viâ Asia Minor. The part played by the Phœnicians in Greek life is now reduced within narrow limits;<br> in the case of the ''mina,'' probably their commercial activities may be considered as likely to have caused the adoption of the term.</ref> in the case of Greece, from Carthage by way  of Etruria or Sicily in the case of Rome, and from Babylon in the case of India. The identification as regards [[मना|Manā]] is very conjectural, depending merely on the probabilities of Babylonian borrowing<ref name=fx4_ve2_474> See, ''e.g.,'' for borrowing, Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 276;<br> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 50, 43 ''et seq.;<br>'' Bühler, ''Indian Studies,'' 3, 16 ''et seq.;<br> Indische Palœographie,'' 17;<br> Vincent Smith, ''Indian Antiquary,'' 34, 230. On the other side, ''cf.'' Max Müller, ''India,'' 133-138;<br> Hopkins, ''Religions of India,'' 160;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 139 (as regards the flood legend): Bloomfield, ''Religions of India,'' 133 ''et seq.'' (as regards the Ādityas).</ref> seen--''e.g.,'' in the legend of the flood, and in the system of the '''Nakṣatras.''' On the other hand, Mahā may very well be identical with the word ''[[मना|manā]]'' which occurs several times in the Rigveda<ref name=fx5_ve2_474> i. 173, 2;<br> iv. 33, 2, x. 6, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iv. 19;<br> ‘jealousy, Rv. ii. 33, 5, Kanśika [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], cvii. 2. There are also the derivatives ''[[मना|manā]]-ya,'' ‘think of,’ ‘be zealous’: Rv. i. 133, 4;<br> ii. 26, 2;<br> ''[[मना|manā]]-ya,'' ‘desirous’: Rv. i. 92, 9;<br> iv. 24, 7;<br> ''[[मना|manā]]-vasu,'' ‘rich in devotion’: Rv. v. 74, 1.</ref> in the sense of ‘desire’ (from the root ''man,'' ‘think’), and which may have in this one passage the concrete sense of ‘desirable object.’ It is to be noted that in Bo7htlingk's Dictionary a single word [[मना|Manā]] appears, to which the only senses assigned are ‘wish,’ ‘desire,’ ‘jealousy.’

मनावी
<u>'''Manāvī,'''</u> ‘wife of Manu,’ is mentioned in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_475> xxx. 1 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 462).</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_475> i. 1, 4, 16.</ref> See '''Manu.'''

मनु
<u>'''Manu'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_476> i. 80, 16;<br> ii. 33. 13;<br> viii. 63. 1;<br> x. 100, 5, etc. See Macdonell, ''Velk Mythology,'' 50.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_476> Av. xiv. 2, 41;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 5, 1, 3;<br> vii. 5. 15, 3;<br> ii. 5, 9, 1;<br> 6, 7, 1;<br> iii. 3, 2, 1;<br> v. 4, 10, 5;<br> vi. 6. 6, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā. viii. 15;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 4. 14, etc. Jainiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 15, 2, etc.</ref> has no claim to historical reality. He is simply the first man, father of the race, and its guide in all matters, sacrificial and other. Hence the views of the texts on inheritance are foisted on Manu and his youngest son, '''[[नाभानेदिष्ठ|Nābhānediṣṭha]].'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_476> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 9, 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 14, 1. 2.</ref> He also plays the part of the hero in the Vedic legend of the flood.<ref name=fx4_ve2_476> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 1, 1 ''et seq.,'' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 2.</ref> <br><br>Manu is called Vivasvan<ref name=fx5_ve2_476> Rv. viii. 52, 1.</ref> or Vaivasvata,<ref name=fx6_ve2_476> Av. viii. 10, 24;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 3, 3;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 7;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], xii. 10.</ref> ‘son of Vivasvant’ (the god); [[सावर्णि|Sāvarṇi]],<ref name=fx6_ve2_476/> ‘descendant of Savarṇā’ (the substitute of Saraṇyū in the legend of her wedding); and [[सांवरणि|Sāṃvaraṇi]],<ref name=fx7_ve2_476> Rv. viii. 51, 1;<br> Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 180, n., conjectures [[सावर्णि|Sāvarṇi]] instead. ''Cf.'' Scheftelowitz, ''Die Apokryphen des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 38.</ref> ‘descendant of [[संवरण|Saṃvaraṇa]].’ The first name is, of course, mythical. The other two have been regarded as historical, [[सावर्णि|Sāvarṇi]] being taken by Ludwig<ref name=fx8_ve2_476> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 166. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 195;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 11, 240;<br> Lévi, ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 114 ''et seq.;<br>'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Muir, ''Sanskrit texts,'' 1^2, 161 ''et seq.;<br>'' Bühler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 25, lvii ''et seq.;<br>'' Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 340 ''et seq.''</ref> as a king of the '''Turvaśas,''' but this is very doubtful.

मनोर् अवसर्पण
<u>'''Manor Avasarpaṇa'''</u> is the name, in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_477> i. 8, 1, 8.</ref> of the mountain on which the vessel of '''Manu''' rested. In the Epic the name is Naubandhana, but the view<ref name=fx2_ve2_477> See Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 139;<br> Whitney, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 162;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 30;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 676.</ref> that it is alluded to as '''[[नावप्रभ्रंशन|Nāvaprabhraṃśana]]''' in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_477> xix. 39, 8.</ref> is now abandoned.<ref name=fx4_ve2_477> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 961;<br> Macdonell, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1907, 1107.</ref>

मनुष्य-राज
<u>'''Manuṣya-rāja'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_478> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 30;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 15, 6;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiv. 7.</ref> and '''Manuṣya-[[राजन्|rājan]]'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_478> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xviii. 10, 5;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 26, 4.</ref> denote in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas a ‘king of men.’ ''Cf.'' '''[[राजन्|Rājan]].'''

मनुष्य-विश्
<u>'''Manuṣya-viś,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_479> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 9, 1.</ref> '''Manuṣya-viśa,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_479> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 4, 7, 7;<br> vi. 1, 5, 3.</ref> and '''Manuṣya-viśā'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_479> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 6;<br> xxiii. 8.</ref> denote ‘mankind,’ ‘the human race,’ in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas. 

मन्त्र
<u>'''Mantra'''</u> (from the root ''man,'' ‘think’) denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_480> i. 31, 13;<br> 40, 5;<br> 67, 4;<br> 74, 1;<br> 152, 2;<br> ii. 35, 2, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_480> Av. xv. 2, 1;<br> xix. 54, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 5, 4, 1;<br> 5, 1, etc.</ref> the ‘hymn’ as the product of the singer's creative thought. In the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx3_ve2_480> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 14, 23;<br> vi. 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxvi. 3. 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 4, 6;<br> xi. 2, 1, 6, [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vii. 1, etc.;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vii. 1, 3.</ref> the word is regularly used of the poetic and prose utterances of the [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]], including not merely the verse parts of the Saṃhitās, but also the prose formulæ that betray by their style their special and archaic character.<ref name=fx4_ve2_480> Bloomfield, ''Vedic Concordance,'' viii;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 298. Macdonel's ''Vedic Grammar'' covers the [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] material of the Vedic Saṃhitās, prose as well as poetry.</ref>

मन्त्र-कृत्
<u>'''Mantra-kṛt'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_481> ix. 114, 2.</ref> and the '''Brāhmaṇas'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_481> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 1, 1;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 24;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iv. 1.</ref> denotes a poet as a ‘maker of Mantras.’

मन्थ
<u>'''Mantha'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_482> x. 86, 15.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_482> Av. ii. 29, 6;<br> v. 29, 7;<br> x. 6, 2;<br> xviii. 4, 42;<br> xx. 127, 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 5, 1, etc.</ref> denotes a drink in which solid ingredients are mixed with a fluid by stirring, usually parched barley-meal ('''[[सक्तु|Saktu]]''') with milk.<ref name=fx3_ve2_482> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 2, 1, 2;<br> Suśruta, 1, 233, 12, in St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 1''b ad fin.''</ref> All sorts of mixed beverages of this type are mentioned in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx4_ve2_482> xii. 8.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 268, 269;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology, 108''</ref>

मन्था
<u>'''Manthā'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_483> i. 28, 4.</ref> seems to mean a ‘churn.’ So the root ''math'' denotes to ‘churn’ in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve2_483> ii. 2, 10, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 2, 6;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 6, 1. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 161.</ref> In one passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_483> xx. 127, 9. Scheftelowitz in [[खिल|Khila]], v. 10, 3, reads ''manthāṁ'' with Pluti, following the Kaśmīr MS., but misquoting the [[अथर्वन्|Atharvan]] text.</ref> the word is used to denote a drink like '''[[मन्थ|Mantha]].''' 

मन्थावल
<u>'''Manthāvala'''</u> is the name of an animal in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_484> iii. 26, 3.</ref> a sort of snake according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary. Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx2_ve2_484> P. 291 (ed. Aufrecht). ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 86.</ref> understands it to be a kind of animal which hangs head downwards from the branches of trees, meaning, presumably, the flying fox.<ref name=fx3_ve2_484> This is the probable meaning of the word according to Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[मान्थाल|Mānthāla]], Mānthīlava.'''

मन्थिन्
<u>'''Manthin'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_485> iii. 32, 2;<br> ix. 46, 4. Tilak's conjecture that the planets are referred to here is absurd. See ''Orion,'' 162;<br> Whitney, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, xciv.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_485> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 6, 3;<br> vi. 4, 10, 1;<br> vii. 2, 7, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vii. 18;<br> viii. 57;<br> xiii. 57;<br> xviii. 19;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 6, etc.</ref> denotes Soma juice mixed with meal ('''[[सक्तु|Saktu]]''') by stirring.

मन्दीर
<u>'''Mandīra'''</u> is perhaps the name of a man whose cattle, according to a [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] in the Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xiii. 3, 21), did not drink the water of the '''[[गङ्गा|Gaṅgā]]''' (Ganges). See '''[[मङ्गीर|Maṅgīra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

मन्धातृ
<u>'''1. Mandhātṛ'''</u> occurs in several passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_487> i. 112, 13;<br> viii. 39, 8;<br> 40, 12;<br> x. 2, 2.</ref> in all of which Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_487> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> takes the word as merely an adjective used substantively, ‘the pious man.’ In one passage<ref name=fx3_ve2_487> Rv. x. 2, 2.</ref> the word, being applied to Agni, is thus used, but in another<ref name=fx4_ve2_487> Rv. viii. 40, 12.</ref> ''Mandhātṛvat'' being parallel with ''Aṅgirasvat,'' ‘like [[अङ्गिरस्|Aṅgiras]],’ is naturally to be understood as a proper name, which is probably also the sense of the word in the preceding hymn.<ref name=fx5_ve2_487> Rv. viii. 39, 8.</ref> A different [[मन्धातृ|Mandhātṛ]]<ref name=fx6_ve2_487> Rv. i. 112, 13.</ref> may be meant in the first Maṇḍala,<ref name=fx6_ve2_487/> where he is mentioned as a protégé of the Aśvins, and evidently as a king. To equate these persons, and make a Rājarṣi out of [[मन्धातृ|Mandhātṛ]], as Ludwig<ref name=fx7_ve2_487> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 107. where he attributes Rv. viii. 39-42 to him as a '''[[नाभाक|Nābhāka]],''' ‘descendant of '''[[नभाक|Nabhāka]].'''’</ref> and Griffith<ref name=fx8_ve2_487> ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 147.</ref> do, is unnecessary and improbable. 

मन्धातृ यौवनाश्व
<u>'''2. Mandhātṛ Yauvanāśva'''</u> (‘descendant of Yuvanāśva’) is in the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_488> i. 2, 10 ''et seq. Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 111.</ref> the name of an emperor who was instructed by '''Vicārin,''' son of '''[[कबन्ध आथर्वण|Kabandha Ātharvaṇa]].'''

मन्या
<u>'''Manyā'''</u> (plur.), ‘nape of the neck,’ occurs in a passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_489> vi. 25, 1.</ref> directed against a disease which Bloomfield<ref name=fx2_ve2_489> ''Proceedings of the American Oriental Society,'' October, 1887, xix;<br> ''American Journal of Philology,'' 11, 327 ''et seq.;<br> Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 472.</ref> regards as scrofulous swellings on the neck. He compares the disease Manskunder, ‘tumours of the neck’ (which looks like a combination of the words ''[[मन्या|manyā]]'' and ''[[स्कन्ध्या|skandhyā]],'' ‘pains of the neck and shoulders,’ both occurring in verses 1 and 3 of the [[अथर्वन्|Atharvan]] hymn), mentioned by Wise.<ref name=fx3_ve2_489> ''System of Hindu Medicine,'' 316.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 202;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 298, 299.</ref>

ममता
<u>'''Mamatā'''</u> is, according to Sāyaṇa, in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_490> vi. 10, 2. ''Cf.'' Mahābhārata, i. 4179 ''et seq.''</ref> the wife of Ucathya and the mother of '''[[दीर्घतमस्|Dīrghatamas]].''' But the word may be merely an abstract noun meaning ‘selfinterest,’ a sense which it often has in the later language. Oldenberg<ref name=fx2_ve2_490> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 212.</ref> finds a mention of Mamata (masc.) in a verse of the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_490> vi. 50, 15, where the reading of the received text is ''mama tasya.''</ref> as the name of a '''[[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]].'''

मय
<u>'''Maya'''</u> is found once in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā (xxii. 19) in the sense of ‘horse.’<br>==Foot Notes==

मयु
<u>'''Mayu'''</u> occurs in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_492> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 12, 1;<br> Vājasanevi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 31.</ref> The commentator on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_492/> explains the word as meaning either an ‘ape’ (''[[किंपुरुष|kiṃpuruṣa]]'') or a ‘forest peacock’ (''āraṇya-[[मयूर|mayūra]]'').  The former sense is supported by another passage of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve2_492> viii. 47;<br> ''mayu āraṇya'' in [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 10, 1.</ref> where the Mayu, being a substitute for the man, must be an ape. This sense also suits the word in the other passage<ref name=fx3_ve2_492> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 5, 2, 22.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 85;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 246.</ref> where it occurs.

मयूख
<u>'''Mayūkha'''</u> denotes, from the Rigveda onwards,<ref name=fx1_ve2_493> Rv. vii. 99, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 1, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 6;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 15, 9. etc.</ref> a ‘peg,’ especially as used for keeping a web stretched.<ref name=fx2_ve2_493> Rv. x. 130, 2 (in a metaphor);<br> Av. x. 7, 42;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxvi. 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 5, 3, etc.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Otu.'''

मयूर
<u>'''Mayūra,'''</u> ‘peacock,’ occurs in the Rigveda in the compounds describing Indra's horses, ''[[मयूर|mayūra]]-roman,''<ref name=fx1_ve2_494> Rv. iii. 45, 1.</ref> ‘with hair like peacocks’ feathers,’ and ''[[मयूर|mayūra]]-śepya,''<ref name=fx2_ve2_494> Rv. viii. 1, 25.</ref> ‘with tails like those of peacocks.’ The peacock also appears in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx3_ve2_494> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 23. 27.</ref> The pea-hen, Mayūrī, is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve2_494> i. 191, 14 (a late hymn).</ref> and the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx5_ve2_494> vii. 56, 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 90.</ref> in both cases with reference to the bird's efficacy against poison, a curious superstition to be compared with the modern dislike of peacocks' feathers.

मरीचि
<u>'''Marīci'''</u> in the plural denotes according to Weber,<ref name=fx1_ve2_495> ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 9, accepted by the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> the ‘particles of light’ or ‘shining motes’ that fill the air, as opposed to rays of light (''[[रश्मि|raśmi]]''). This meaning adequatelysuits the passages in the early Vedic literature<ref name=fx2_ve2_495> Rv. x. 57, 12;<br> 177, 1;<br> Av. iv. 38, 5 (where ''[[रश्मि|raśmi]]'' and ''[[मरीचि|marīci]]'' are opposed);<br> v. 27, 10;<br> vi. 113, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 4, 5, 5 (''[[मरीचि|marīci]]-pa,'' ‘drinking atoms of light,’ said of the gods);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 9, 2 (where Sāyaṇa's version, ''sarvatra-prasṛtaprabhā-dravya,'' refers to the light as everywhere diffused), etc.</ref> where the  word occurs; but the sense of ‘ray’ is quite clearly found in the Upaniṣads,<ref name=fx3_ve2_495> [[प्रश्न|Praśna]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 2. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 1, 2;<br> 2, 1;<br> '''Maitrāyaṇī''' [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 31.</ref> as well as the older sense.<ref name=fx4_ve2_495> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 2.</ref>

मरु
<u>'''Maru,'''</u> in the plural, is mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx1_ve2_496> v. 1, 1.</ref> as the ''utkara'' (‘mound of earth thrown up’ from the excavation of the altar<ref name=fx2_ve2_496> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' xii. 25, 54.</ref> ) of '''[[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]].''' This seems to mean that the Maru deserts (the later Maru-sthala)<ref name=fx3_ve2_496> ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 48, and '''[[धन्वन्|Dhanvan]].'''<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 78.</ref> were so called because they stood to the ‘altar,’ [[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]], in the same relation as the waste earth of the ''utkara'' to the altar at the sacrifice.

मरुत्त आवि-क्षित
<u>'''Marutta Āvi-kṣita'''</u> (‘descendant of Avikṣit’) '''[[काम-प्रि|Kāma-pri]]''' (‘descendant of Kāmapra’) is the name of a king who was anointed by '''[[संवर्त|Saṃvarta]]''' according to the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_497> viii. 21, 12.</ref> In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_497> xiii. 5, 4, 6. ''Cf.'' also [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 9, 14. 16;<br> Maitrāyaṇī [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 4.</ref> account of the same king he is called '''[[आयोगव|Āyogava]].'''

मरुद्-वृधा
<u>'''Marud-vṛdhā'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_498> Literally, ‘rejoicing in the Maruts’ -''i.e.,'' ‘swollen by the rainy winds.’ The misspelling of the name as Marudvṛddhā in Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 80, 88, is corrected in the Index and the Addenda of that work. On the accentuation of the name, see Vārttika 2 on Pāṇini, vi. 2, 106.</ref> is the name of a stream mentioned in the Nadīstuti (‘Praise of Rivers’) in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_498> x. 75, 5.</ref> along with the '''[[असिक्नी|Asiknī]]''' (Akesines) and the '''[[वितस्ता|Vitastā]]''' (Hydaspes). Roth<ref name=fx3_ve2_498> ''Zur Litteratur und Geschichte des Weda,'' 138 ''et seq.''</ref> considers that the [[मरुद्वृधा|Marudvṛdhā]] denotes the stream formed by the combined waters of these two rivers down to its junction with the '''[[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]]''' (Ravi), a view accepted by Zimmer.<ref name=fx4_ve2_498> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 11, 12.</ref> On the other hand, Ludwig<ref name=fx5_ve2_498> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 200.</ref> thinks that the [[मरुद्वृधा|Marudvṛdhā]] designates  the stream formed by the junction of the [[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]] with the combined waters of the [[असिक्नी|Asiknī]] and [[वितस्ता|Vitastā]], a view which seems less likely.

मर्क
<u>'''1. Marka'''</u> is found in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_499> x. 27, 20.</ref> where Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_499> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' He thinks, however, that if the word means ‘eclipse,’ it cannot be derived from the root ''mṛc,'' ‘injure.’</ref> sees in the expression ''sūro markaḥ'' the ‘eclipse of the sun.’ Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx3_ve2_499> As from the root ''mṛj,'' derivation from which is not phonetically justified.</ref> thinks the meaning is ‘purifying.’<ref name=fx4_ve2_499> Ludwig cites this passage, in his essay on eclipses in the Rigveda (Proceedings of the Bohemian Academy, 1885), as a proof that the Vedic [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]] knew of the moon as eclipsing the sun;<br> but see Whitney's reply, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, lxi ''et seq.,'' and [[सूर्य|Sūrya]].</ref>

मर्क
<u>'''2. Marka'''</u> is mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_500> vi. 4, 10, 1.</ref> and elsewhere<ref name=fx2_ve2_500> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 6, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 1, 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 2, 1, 4.</ref> as the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], along with '''[[शण्ड|Śaṇḍa]],''' of the Asuras, while [[बृहस्पति|Bṛhaspati]] is, of course, the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of the gods. [[मर्क|Marka]] is mentioned elsewhere also.<ref name=fx3_ve2_500> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vii. 16, 17.</ref> The name may quite possibly have Iranian affinities, as believed by Hillebrandt<ref name=fx4_ve2_500> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 442 ''et seq.''</ref> and by Hopkins.<ref name=fx5_ve2_500> ''Cf. Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 49, n. 1.</ref> Hillebrandt<ref name=fx6_ve2_500> ''Op. cit.,'' 1, 223 ''et seq.''</ref> also sees in a [[गृध्र|Gṛdhra]] mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx7_ve2_500> v. 77, 1.</ref> and elsewhere<ref name=fx8_ve2_500> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iv. 29;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 9, 19.<br><br>''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 279 ''et seq.''</ref> a prototype of [[मर्क|Marka]].

मर्कट
<u>'''Markaṭa,'''</u> ‘ape,’ is enumerated in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_501> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 11, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 11;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 30.</ref> It is classified in the same Saṃhitās<ref name=fx2_ve2_501> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 4, 5, 7;<br> Maitāyani Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 7.</ref> with man and the elephant as ‘taking hold by the hand’ (''[[हस्तादान|hastādāna]]'') instead of ‘taking hold by the mouth’ (''mukhādāna''). The animal is mentioned several times elsewhere also.<ref name=fx3_ve2_501> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 4;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 184;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 11, 32, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 85.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[पुरुष हस्तिन्|Puruṣa Hastin]], Mayu.''' 

मर्य
<u>'''1. Marya'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_502> iii. 31, 7;<br> 33, 10;<br> iv. 20, 5;<br> ix. 96, 20, etc.;<br> ''[[मर्य|marya]]-[[श्री|śrī]],'' ‘adorred as a lover,’ ii. 10, 5. ''Cf.'' '''Nīrukta,''' iii. 15;<br> iv. 2.</ref> denotes a ‘man’ especially regarded as young and a lover, being constantly mentioned as in company with maidens (''yuvatī'').

मर्य
<u>'''2. Marya'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_503> vii. 56, 16;<br> viii. 43, 25.</ref> in several passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_503/> denotes a ‘stallion.’<ref name=fx2_ve2_503> This is, of course, only a specialized sense of 1. [[मर्य|Marya]] as meaning a ‘male’ (''cf.'' Lat. ''mas, maritus''). The specialized meaning is somewhat analogous to the use of ‘sire’ in English.</ref> It is once<ref name=fx3_ve2_503> Rv. ix. 97, 18. Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 2, thinks Rv. i. 91, 13, may have the same sense.</ref> described as ''[[पस्त्यावन्त्|pastyāvant]],'' ‘a stalled horse’--that is, one carefully tended, and not allowed out to graze.

मर्यक
<u>'''Maryaka,'''</u> occurring only once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_504> v. 2. 5. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 313.</ref> seems to denote the bull which is described as separated from the cows.

मर्यादा
<u>'''Maryādā,'''</u> ‘boundary,’ is found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_505> i. 4, 1, 17. ''Cf.'' xiii. 8, 4, 12.</ref> referring to the boundary between the '''Kosalas''' and the '''Videhas.''' Usually the word is metaphorically employed.<ref name=fx2_ve2_505> Rv. iv. 5, 13;<br> x. 5, 6;<br> Av. vi. 81, 2 (of an amulet). In the Atharvaveda passage Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 392, suggests, owing to the very curious use of the word, the emendation ''[[मर्य|marya]]-dā,'' ‘giver of a son.’</ref>

मल
<u>'''Mala'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_506> x. 136, 2.</ref> is used of the garments of the Munis. The St. Petersburg Dictionary takes it to mean a ‘leathern garment,’<ref name=fx2_ve2_506> If this were correct, the word might be derived from ''mlā'' in the sense of ‘to tan.’ ''Cf.'' '''[[चर्मन्|Carman]],''' especially notes 6 and 7.</ref> but Ludwig and Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve2_506> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 262.</ref> think it means only ‘soiled’ raiment, which, of course, suits the ordinary sense of the word (‘dirt’) in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx4_ve2_506> vi. 115, 3;<br> vii. 89, 3;<br> x. 5, 24, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 333, n.</ref> and the character of the long-haired (''[[केशिन्|keśin]]'') hermit ('''Muni'''). ''Cf.'' '''[[मलग|Malaga]].''' 

मल-ग
<u>'''Mala-ga'''</u> in one passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_507> xii. 3, 21.</ref> denotes a cleanser of clothes, a ‘washerman,’ but the origin of the word is somewhat uncertain.<ref name=fx2_ve2_507> It may, perhaps, have primarily meant ‘concerned with dirt.’ See the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. ga'' 1, on the use of ''ga'' as forming compounds;<br> and ''cf.'' '''Mala.'''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 262;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 188.</ref>

मलिम्लु
<u>'''Malimlu'''</u> in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_508> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 3, 2, 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xi. 78. 79;<br> Av. xix. 49, 10.</ref> denotes a ‘robber,’ specifically, according to the commentator Mahīdhara, a burglar or housebreaker. ''Cf.'' '''[[तायु|Tāyu]], [[तस्कर|Taskara]], [[स्तेन|Stena]],''' and '''[[देवमलिम्लुच्|Devamalimluc]].'''

मलिम्लुच
<u>'''Malimluca'''</u> is the name of an intercalary month in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve2_509> xxxv. 10;<br> xxxviii. 14. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''[[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]],'' 100, 102;<br> ''Naxatra,'' 2, 350.</ref> See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''

मशक
<u>'''1. Maśaka'''</u> denotes a ‘biting fly’ or ‘mosquito,’ being described in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_510> vii. 56, 3.</ref> as ‘quickly(?) biting’ (''tṛpradaṃśin''), and as having a poisonous sting. The elephant is mentioned<ref name=fx2_ve2_510> Av. iv. 36, 9.</ref> as particularly subject to its stings. The insect is often referred to elsewhere.<ref name=fx3_ve2_510> Av. xi. 3, 5;<br> at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’), Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 29;<br> xxv. 3;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 3, 24 (Mādhyaṃdina = i. 3, 22 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 9, 3;<br> 10, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 97.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[दंश|Daṃśa]].'''

मशक गार्ग्य
<u>'''2. Maśaka Gārgya'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[गर्ग|Garga]]'''’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[स्थिरक गार्ग्य|Sthiraka Gārgya]],''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_511> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373, 382.</ref> He is also mentioned in the Sūtras<ref name=fx2_ve2_511> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vii. 9, 14;<br> Anupada [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 75, 76;<br> 83, 84.</ref> of the [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]], and is the reputed author of an extant [[कल्प|Kalpa]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]. 

मशर्शार
<u>'''Maśarśāra'''</u> is the name of a king, according to Ludwig,<ref name=fx1_ve2_512> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 206.</ref> of the '''Nahuṣas,''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_512> i. 122, 15.</ref>

मष्णार
<u>'''Maṣṇāra'''</u> is the name of a locality, the scene of the victory of a '''Kuru''' king, in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_513> viii. 23, 3. ''Cf.'' Bhāgavata [[पुराण|Purāṇa]], v. 13, 26 ''et seq.;<br>'' Leumann, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 80, n. 2.</ref>

मसूर
<u>'''Masūra'''</u> is the name of a kind of lentil (''Ervum hirsutum'') in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_514> xviii. 12.</ref> and the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_514> vi. 3, 22 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 3, 13 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 355;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 241.</ref>

मसूस्य
<u>'''Masūsya,'''</u> occurring in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 8, 14, 6), is, according to the commentator, the name of a grain of the north country.<br>==Foot Notes==

मस्तु
<u>'''Mastu'''</u> in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_516> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 1, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvi. 1.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_516> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 1, 7;<br> iii. 3, 3, 2, etc.</ref> denotes ‘sour curds.’

मह-र्त्विज्
<u>'''Maha-rtvij,'''</u> ‘great priest,’ is the collective name of the four chief priests--[[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]], [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], [[होतृ|Hotṛ]], and Udgātṛ--in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_517> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 2, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 1, 1, 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 1, 7, etc.</ref>

मह-र्षभ
<u>'''Maha-rṣabha,'''</u> a ‘great bull,’ is mentioned in the Atharvaveda (iv. 15, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

मह-र्षि
<u>'''Maha-rṣi,'''</u> a ‘great [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]],’ is mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka (i. 9, 6). ''Cf.'' '''[[महाब्राह्मण|Mahābrāhmaṇa]].''' <br>==Foot Notes==

महा-कुल
<u>'''Mahā-kula,'''</u> ‘sprung from a great family,’ is the designation of a bowl or cup ('''[[चमस|Camasa]]''') in the Rigveda (i. 161, 1). The metaphorical use of this word shows that the high position of certain families was already recognized in the times of the Rigveda.<br>==Foot Notes==

महा-कौषीतक
<u>'''Mahā-kauṣītaka,'''</u> the ‘Great Kauṣītaka ([[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]),’ is the name of a Vedic text in the Rigveda [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] Sūtras.<ref name=fx1_ve2_521> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 4;<br> Mahākauṣītaki, the teacher, in [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 10;<br> vi. 1, etc. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 29, 3, 4.</ref>

महाज
<u>'''Mahāja,'''</u> a ‘great goat’ ('''Aja''') is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 4, 1, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

महा-धन
<u>'''Mahā-dhana'''</u> in the Rigveda denotes either a ‘great fight’<ref name=fx1_ve2_523> Rv. i. 7, 5;<br> 40, 8;<br> 112, 17;<br> vi. 59, 7, etc.</ref> or a ‘great prize’<ref name=fx2_ve2_523> ix. 86, 12.</ref> as the result of a fight. In many cases the fight may mean merely the contest of the chariot race.

महा-नग्नी
<u>'''Mahā-nagnī'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_524> xiv. 1, 36;<br> xx. 136, 5 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 27, 1.</ref> denotes a ‘courtesan.’ The masculine, Mahā-nagna,<ref name=fx2_ve2_524> Av. xx. 136, 11;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 24, 14. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 747;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 280, n. 1.</ref> ‘paramour,’ is probably secondarily. derived from the feminine [[महानग्नी|Mahānagnī]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_524> As ''[[स-पत्न|sa-patna]],'' ‘rival,’ is unmistakably formed from ''[[स-पत्नी|sa-patnī]],'' ‘co-wife.’</ref>

महा-नाग
<u>'''Mahā-nāga,'''</u> a ‘great snake,’ is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xi. 2, 7, 12), where it is plainly mythical.<br>==Foot Notes==

महा-निरष्ट
<u>'''Mahā-niraṣṭa,'''</u> a ‘great castrated’ ox, is mentioned as the '''[[दक्षिणा|Dakṣiṇā]],''' or ‘sacrificial fee,’ in the house of the '''[[सूत|Sūta]]''' at the '''[[राजसूय|Rājasūya]]''' (‘royal consecration’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_526> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 9, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 4, 9;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 5.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[अनड्वाह्|Anaḍvāh]]''' and '''Go.''' 

महा-पथ
<u>'''Mahā-patha'''</u> in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_527> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 17, 8;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 6, 2. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 271, n.</ref> denotes the ‘high road’ between two villages.

महा-पुर
<u>'''Mahā-pura'''</u> in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_528> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 3, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiv. 10;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 8, 1.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_528> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 23, 2;<br> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 7.</ref> denotes a great fortress.<ref name=fx1_ve2_528/> Probably the only difference between the '''Pur''' and the [[महापुर|Mahāpura]] was size.

महा-ब्राह्मण
<u>'''Mahā-brāhmaṇa,'''</u> a ‘great Brahmin,’ is found in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (ii. 1, 19. 22) denoting a Brahmin of great consequence. ''Cf.'' '''[[महर्षि|Maharṣi]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

महाभिषेक
<u>'''Mahābhiṣeka,'''</u> ‘great consecration,’ is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_530> viii. 14, 4;<br> 19, 2. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 8. The list is '''[[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]] [[पारिक्षित|Pārikṣita]],''' whose friend was '''[[तुर कावषेय|Tura Kāvaṣeya]];<br> [[शार्यात|Śāryāta]] [[मानव|Mānava]]''' and '''[[च्यवन|Cyavana]] [[भार्गव|Bhārgava]];<br> Satānīka [[सात्राजित|Sātrājita]]''' and '''Somaśuṣma [[भार्गव|Bhārgava]];<br> [[अम्बरीष|Ambarīṣa]]''' and '''[[पर्वत|Parvata]]''' and '''[[नारद|Nārada]];<br> [[युधांश्रौष्टि औग्रसैन्य|Yudhāṃśrauṣṭi Augrasainya]]''' and the same two [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]];<br> '''[[विश्वकर्मन् भौवन|Viśvakarman Bhauvana]]''' and '''[[कश्यप|Kaśyapa]];<br> [[सुदास्|Sudās]] [[पैजवन|Paijavana]]''' and '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]];<br> [[मरुत्त आविक्षित|Marutta Āvikṣita]]''' and '''[[संवर्त|Saṃvarta]];<br> [[अङ्ग वैरोचन|Aṅga Vairocana]]''' and '''[[उदमय आत्रेय|Udamaya Ātreya]];<br> [[भरत|Bharata]] [[दौःषन्ति|Dauḥṣanti]]''' and '''[[दीर्घतमस्|Dīrghatamas]] [[मामतेय|Māmateya]];<br> [[दुर्मुख|Durmukha]] [[पाञ्चाल|Pāñcāla]]''' and '''[[बृहद्उक्थ|Bṛhaduktha]];<br> [[अत्य्अराति जानंतपि|Atyarāti Jānaṃtapi]]''' and '''[[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]] [[सात्यहव्य|Sātyahavya]].'''</ref> and described as a ceremony performed for great kings, a list of whom is given. It is equivalent to the '''[[राजसूय|Rājasūya]].'''

महा-भूत
<u>'''Mahā-bhūta'''</u> in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (xiv. 5, 10) and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iii. 2, 3) denotes the ‘gross elements’ (earth, water, fire, air, ether).<br>==Foot Notes==

महा-मत्स्य
<u>'''Mahā-matsya,'''</u> a ‘great fish,’ is mentioned in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iv. 3, 18).<br>==Foot Notes==

महा-मेरु
<u>'''Mahā-meru,'''</u> ‘great Meru,’ is the name of a mountain in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx1_ve2_533> i. 7, 1, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 78;<br> 3, 123.</ref> 

महा-रथ
<u>'''Mahā-ratha,'''</u> ‘having a great car’--''i.e.,'' ‘a great chariot fighter,’ is an epithet of the hero who is prayed for in the ritual of the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_534> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 18, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 22.</ref>

महा-राज
<u>'''Mahā-rāja,'''</u> a ‘great king,’ is frequently referred to in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_535> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 34, 9;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 4, 21;<br> ii. 5, 4, 9;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1, 19 ''et seq.;<br>'' Maitrāyaṇī [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1, etc.</ref> It seems to mean no more than a king, or rather perhaps a reigning and powerful king, as opposed to a mere prince, who would also be called '''[[राजन्|Rājan]].'''

महा-रात्र
<u>'''Mahā-rātra,'''</u> ‘advanced night,’ is a phrase found in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_536> ii. 9;<br> xi. 8.</ref> and the Sūtras<ref name=fx2_ve2_536> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vi. 2, 1;<br> xvii. 7, 1, etc.</ref> to denote the latter part of the night, after midnight and before dawn.

महार्णव
<u>'''Mahārṇava,'''</u> a ‘great ocean,’ is a phrase not found before the late Maitrāyaṇī [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (i. 4), where the drying up of ‘great oceans’ is one of the marvels enumerated. ''Cf.'' '''[[सम्उद्र|Samudra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

महा-वीर
<u>'''Mahā-vīra'''</u> (‘great hero’) is the name in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_538> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 14;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1, 2, 9, 17;<br> 3, 1, 13;<br> 4, 16;<br> 2, 2, 13. 40;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 10, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 3, 7, etc.</ref> of a large earthenware pot which could be placed on the fire, and which was especially employed at the introductory Soma ceremony called Pravargya.

महा-वृक्ष
<u>'''Mahā-vṛkṣa'''</u> a ‘great tree,’ is mentioned sometimes in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 6, 15; xiv. 1, 12) and in the Sūtras.<br>==Foot Notes==

महा-वृष
<u>'''Mahā-vṛṣa'''</u> is the name of a tribe mentioned along with the '''Mūjavants''' in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_540> v. 22, 4, 5, 8.</ref> as a locality to which fever is to be relegated. It is reasonable to suppose that they were  northerners, though Bloomfield<ref name=fx2_ve2_540> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 446.</ref> suggests that the name may be chosen more for its sound and sense (as ‘of mighty strength’ to resist the disease) than for its geographical position. In the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_540> iv. 2, 5.</ref> the place '''[[रैक्वपर्ण|Raikvaparṇa]]''' is said to be in the [[महावृष|Mahāvṛṣa]] country. The king of the Mahāvṛṣas in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_540> iii. 40, 2.</ref> is said to be '''Hṛtsvāśaya.''' The Mahāvṛṣas are also known from a [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx5_ve2_540> ii. 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 70, 147;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 129;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 259, 260.</ref>

महा-शाल
<u>'''1. Mahā-śāla'''</u> (lit., ‘having a great house’), a ‘great householder,’ is an expression applied in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (v. 11, 1) to the Brahmins who were instructed by '''[[अश्वपति|Aśvapati]],''' no doubt to emphasize their importance. ''Cf.'' '''[[महाब्राह्मण|Mahābrāhmaṇa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

महा-शाल जाबाल
<u>'''2. Mahā-śāla Jābāla'''</u> is the name of a teacher twice mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], once as instructing '''[[धीर शातपर्णेय|Dhīra Śātaparṇeya]],'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_542> x. 3, 3, 1.</ref> and once as one of the Brahmins who received instruction from '''[[अश्वपति|Aśvapati]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_542> x. 6, 1, 1.</ref> In the parallel passage of the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_542> v. 11, 1.</ref> the name is '''[[प्राचीनशाल औपमन्यव|Prācīnaśāla Aupamanyava]].'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_542> ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 43, 393, n. 1.</ref> The word must be considered a proper name rather than an adjective (1. '''[[महाशाल|Mahāśāla]]'''), as it is taken in the St. Petersburg Dictionary.<ref name=fx5_ve2_542> In Muṇḍaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 1, 3, the word is used of '''[[शौनक|Śaunaka]],''' perhaps merely as an epithet. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 161.</ref>

महा-सुपर्ण
<u>'''Mahā-suparṇa'''</u> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xii. 2, 3, 7) denotes a ‘great bird’ or ‘great eagle.’<br>==Foot Notes==

महा-सुहय
<u>'''Mahā-suhaya,'''</u> a ‘great (''i.e.,'' high-spirited) horse,’ is the description in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_544> vi. 2, 13. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, ix. 7;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 1, 12;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 234, 235;<br> Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 57, n. 3. ''Cf.'' '''Paḍhīśa.'''</ref> of the steed from  the Indus (''[[सैन्धव|saindhava]]'') which tears away the peg of its hobble (''[[पड्बीश|paḍbīśa]]-śaṅkhu'').

महा-सूक्त
<u>'''Mahā-sūkta,'''</u> m. plur., the ‘composers of the long hymns’ of the tenth Maṇḍala of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_545> x. 1-128.</ref> are mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx2_ve2_545> ii. 2, 2.</ref> and the Sūtras.<ref name=fx3_ve2_545> Aśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 2;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 10.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 115;<br> 390;<br> Roth, ''Zur Litteratur und Geschichte des Weda,'' 27.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Kṣudra-[[सूक्त|sūkta]].'''

महाह्न
<u>'''Mahāhna'''</u> in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ii. 9) denotes the ‘advanced (time of the) day’--that is, ‘afternoon.’ ''Cf.'' '''[[महारात्र|Mahārātra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

महि-दास ऐतरेय
<u>'''Mahi-[[दास|dāsa]] Aitareya'''</u> (‘descendant of Itara or Itarā’) is the name of the sage from whom the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] and Āraṇyaka take their names. He is several times referred to in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx1_ve2_547> ii. 1, 8;<br> 3, 7.</ref> but not as its author. He is credited with a life of 116 years in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_547> iii. 16, 7.</ref> and the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_547> iv. 2, 11 (''cf. Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 246).<br><br>''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 16, 17.</ref>

महिष
<u>'''Mahiṣa,'''</u> the ‘strong,’ with<ref name=fx1_ve2_548> Rv. viii. 58, 15;<br> ix. 92, 6;<br> 96, 6;<br> x. 123, 4.</ref> or without<ref name=fx2_ve2_548> Rv. v. 29, 7;<br> vi. 67, 11;<br> viii. 12, 8;<br> 66, 10;<br> ix. 87, 7;<br> x. 28, 10;<br> 189, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 28, etc.</ref> '''[[मृग|Mṛga]],''' ‘wild beast,’ denotes the ‘buffalo’ in the Rigveda and the later texts. The feminine, [[महिषी|Mahiṣī]], is found in the later Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx3_ve2_548> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxv. 6;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 8, 5;<br> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 7, 11.</ref>

महिषी
<u>'''1. Mahiṣī.'''</u> See '''[[महिष|Mahiṣa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

महिषी
<u>'''2. Mahiṣī,'''</u> ‘the powerful one,’ the name of the first of the four wives (see '''Pati''') of the king, is mentioned frequently in  the later literature.<ref name=fx1_ve2_550> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 9, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 5;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xix. 1, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 5, 3, 1;<br> vii. 5, 1, 6, etc.</ref> Perhaps even in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_550> v. 2, 2;<br> 37, 3.</ref> the technical sense of ‘first wife’ is present.

महैतरेय
<u>'''Mahaitareya'''</u> is the title of a Vedic text according to the [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] Sūtras of the [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_551> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 4;<br> of a teacher, in [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 10;<br> vi. 1. ''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 39;<br> Oldenberg, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 29, 3, 4.</ref>

महोक्ष
<u>'''Mahokṣa,'''</u> a ‘great bull,’ is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 4, 1, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

मांस
<u>'''Māṃsa,'''</u> ‘flesh.’ The eating of flesh appears as something quite regular in the Vedic texts, which show no trace of the doctrine of Ahiṃsā, or abstaining from injury to animals. For example, the ritual offerings of flesh contemplate that the gods will eat it, and again the Brahmins ate the offerings.<ref name=fx1_ve2_553> So Agni is called ‘eater of ox and cow’ in Rv. viii. 43, 11 = Av. iii. 21, 6 = [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 3, 14, 7;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 280, 281;<br> Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 355.</ref> Again, the slaying of a ‘great ox’ (''[[महोक्ष|mahokṣa]]'') or a ‘great goat’ (''[[महाज|mahāja]]'') for a guest was regularly prescribed;<ref name=fx2_ve2_553> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 1, 2. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 15, 2.</ref> and the name '''[[अतिथिग्व|Atithigva]]''' probably means ‘slaying cows for guests.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_553> Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 17, 426;<br> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, cxxiv. ''Cf. atithinīr gāḥ,'' ‘cows fit for guests,’ Rv. x. 68, 3.</ref> The great sage '''[[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]]''' was wont to eat the meat of milch cows and bullocks (''dhenv-anaḍuha'') if only it was ''aṃsala'' (‘firm’ or ‘tender’).<ref name=fx4_ve2_553> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 2, 21. The sense of ''aṃsala'' is given as ''sthūla,'' firm,’ in the scholiast. ''Cf.'' Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vii. 2, 23-25. Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 11, has tender.’ ‘Off the shoulder’ (''aṃsa'') is also a possible version.</ref> The slaughter of a hundred bulls (''[[उक्षन्|ukṣan]]'') was credited to one sacrificer, '''[[अगस्त्य|Agastya]].'''<ref name=fx5_ve2_553> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 11, 1;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxi. 14, 5.</ref> The marriage ceremony was accompanied by the slaying of oxen, clearly for food.<ref name=fx6_ve2_553> Q.v. x. 85, 13. ''Cf.'' Winternitz, ''Das altindische Hochzeitsrituell,'' 33.</ref> <br><br>That there was any general objection to the eating of flesh is most improbable. Sometimes it is forbidden, as when a man is performing a vow,<ref name=fx7_ve2_553> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 1, 8. So a '''Brahmacārin''' is not to eat flesh. See Oldenberg, ''op. cit.,'' 468, n. 3. The blood of an animal is always a somewhat mysterious and dangerous substance;<br> hence taboos on meat-eating, which in another form arise from fear of the spirits of the dead (''cf.'' Oldenberg, ''op. cit.,'' 414, n. 1). See also Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1, 1, 29;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 588, n. 4.</ref> or its use is disapproved, as in a passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx8_ve2_553> vi. 70, 1. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 493.</ref> where meat is classed with '''[[सुरा|Surā]],''' or intoxicating liquor, as a bad thing. Again, in the Rigveda<ref name=fx9_ve2_553> x. 85, 13. In the Atharvaveda, xiv. 1, 13, the ordinary word [[मघास्|Maghās]] is found, and is, no doubt, really to be preferred. See Weber, Proceedings of the Berlin Academy, 1894, 807.</ref> the slaying of the cows is said to take place in the '''Aghās,''' a deliberate variation for '''[[मघास्|Maghās]];''' but this may be the outcome merely of a natural association of death with gloom, even when cows alone are the victims in question. The Brāhmaṇas also contain the doctrine of the eater in this world being eaten in the next,<ref name=fx10_ve2_553> ''Cf.'' the story of '''[[भृगु|Bhṛgu]] [[वारुणि|Vāruṇi]]''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 6, 1, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 42-44;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 1, 2, with Keith's notes (pp. 202, 203).</ref> but this is not to be regarded as a moral or religious disapproval of eating flesh, though it no doubt contains the germ of such a view, which is also in harmony with the persuasion of the unity of existence, which becomes marked in the Brāhmaṇas. But Ahiṃsā as a developed and articulate doctrine would seem to have arisen from the acceptance of the doctrine of transmigration, which in its fundamentals is later than the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] period.<ref name=fx11_ve2_553> ''Cf.'' Deussen, ''Philosophy of the Upanishads,'' 317 ''et seq.;<br>'' Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 565.</ref><br><br>On the other hand, it is to be noted that the cow was on the road to acquire special sanctity in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx12_ve2_553> viii. 101, 15. 16;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iv. 19, 20;<br> Av. x. 10;<br> xii. 4, 5;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 151.</ref> as is shown by the name ''[[अघ्न्या|aghnyā]],''<ref name=fx13_ve2_553> Found sixteen times in the Rigveda, as opposed to three instances of Aghnya (masculine);<br> Macdonell, ''loc. cit.'' The sense of ‘hard to overcome,’ preferred by the St. Petersburg Dictionary, to that of ‘not to be killed,’ is, however, quite possible. Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 17, 281, tries to derive the word from ''ahanya,'' ‘bright-coloured like dya,’ a derivation that must be regarded as illegitimate.</ref> ‘not to be slain,’ applied to it in several passages. But this fact cannot be regarded as showing that  meat eating generally was condemned. Apart from mythical considerations, such as the identification of the cow with earth or Aditi (which are, of course, much more than an effort of priestly ingenuity), the value of the cow for other purposes than eating was so great as to account adequately for its sanctity, the beginnings of which can in fact be traced back to Indo-Iranian times.<ref name=fx14_ve2_553> ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 68.</ref> Moreover, the ritual of the cremation of the dead required the slaughter of a cow as an essential part, the flesh being used to envelope the dead body.<ref name=fx15_ve2_553> Rv. x. 16, 7. See Oldenberg, ''op. cit.,'' 576.</ref><br><br>The usual food of the Vedic Indian, as far as flesh was concerned, can be gathered from the list of sacrificial victims: what man ate he presented to the gods--that is, the sheep, the goat, and the ox. The horse sacrifice was an infrequent exception: it is probably not to be regarded as a trace of the use of horseflesh as food, though the possibility of such being the case cannot be overlooked in view of the widespread use of horseflesh as food in different countries and times. It is, however, more likely that the aim of this sacrifice was to impart magic strength, the speed and vigour of the horse, to the god and his worshippers, as Oldenberg<ref name=fx16_ve2_553> ''Religion des Veda,'' 356, n. 4. As to meat-eating in Buddhist times, ''cf.'' the death of the Buddha from a meal of pork, Fleet, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1906, 881, 882;<br> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,''^5 231, n. 2 (''contra'' Neumann, ''Die Reden des Gotamo Buddho,'' 1, xix). As to meat-eating in the Epic, see Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 119, 120;<br> ''Great Epic of India,'' 377-379;<br> and see for modern instances Jolly, ''Deutsche Rundschau,'' July, 1884. 118;<br> Bühler, ''Report,'' 23.<br><br>''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 316;<br> Hopkins, ''Religions of India,'' 156, 189.</ref> argues.

मांसौदन
<u>'''Māṃsaudana'''</u> denotes in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_554> xi. 5, 7, 5;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 18;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 8.</ref> a dish consisting of ‘meat cooked with rice.’

माक्षव्य
<u>'''Mākṣavya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Makṣu,’ is the patronymic of a teacher in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx1_ve2_555> iii. 1, 1, which is discussed in the preface to the Rigveda Prātiśākhya. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 391;<br> 2, 212.</ref> 

मागध
<u>'''Māgadha.'''</u> See '''[[मगध|Magadha]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

मागध-देशीय
<u>'''Māgadha-deśīya,'''</u> ‘belonging to the district of '''[[मगध|Magadha]],'''’ is the description in the Sūtras<ref name=fx1_ve2_557> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxii. 4, 22;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 6, 28.</ref> of a Brahmin of [[मगध|Magadha]].

माचल
<u>'''Mācala,'''</u> mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_558> ii. 440. ''Cf. Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 103, n. 3.</ref> apparently denotes some sort of dog found in '''[[विदर्भ|Vidarbha]].'''

माठरी
<u>'''Māṭharī,'''</u> ‘female descendant of Maṭhara,’ occurs in the curious name, '''[[काश्यपी-बालाक्या-माठरी-पुत्र|Kāśyapī-bālākyā-<a class="pada_vei" href="माठरी">māṭharī]]-putra»,''' of a teacher in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 4, 31 Mādhyaṃdina).<br>==Foot Notes==

माण्टि
<u>'''Māṇṭi'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[गौतम|Gautama]],''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_560> ii. 5, 22;<br> iv. 5, 28 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref>

माण्डवी
<u>'''Māṇḍavī,'''</u> ‘female descendant of Maṇḍu,’ occurs in the name of a teacher, '''[[वात्सी-माण्डवी-पुत्र|Vātsī-<a class="pada_vei" href="माण्डवी">māṇḍavī]]-putra»,''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 4, 30 Mādhyaṃdina).<br>==Foot Notes==

माण्डव्य
<u>'''Māṇḍavya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Maṇḍu,’ is mentioned as a teacher in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_562> x. 6, 5, 9.</ref> in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx2_ve2_562> vii. 2.</ref> and in the Sūtras.<ref name=fx3_ve2_562> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 10;<br> vi. 1. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien'' 1, 482 (in the Epic a friend of '''[[जनक|Janaka]]''' is so named).</ref> He is also mentioned as a pupil of '''[[कौत्स|Kautsa]]''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_562> vi. 5, 4 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref>

माण्डूकायनि
<u>'''Māṇḍūkāyani,'''</u> ‘descendant of Māṇḍūka,’ is mentioned as a teacher in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_563> x. 6, 5, 9;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 5, 4 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref> 

माण्डूकायनी-पुत्र
<u>'''Māṇḍūkāyanī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of Māṇḍūka,’ is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[माण्डूकीपुत्र|Māṇḍūkīputra]]''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Brhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_564> vi. 4, 32 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 5, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref>

माण्डूकी-पुत्र
<u>'''Māṇḍūkī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of [[मण्डूक|Maṇḍūka]],’ is mentioned as a teacher, a pupil of '''[[शाण्डिलीपुत्र|Śāṇḍilīputra]],''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_565> vi. 4, 32 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 5, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref>

माण्डूकेय
<u>'''Māṇḍūkeya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Māṇḍūka,’ is the patronymic of several teachers in the Rigveda Āraṇyakas--viz., '''Śūravīra,'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_566> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 1, 1;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, vii. 2. 8. 9. 10.</ref> '''Hrasva,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_566> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, vii. 12;<br> viii. 11.</ref> '''Dīrgha,'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_566> ''Ibid.,'' vii. 2.</ref> '''Madhyama Prātībodhīputra.'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_566> ''Ibid.,'' vii. 13.</ref> The Māṇḍūkeyas also occur as a school in the Āraṇyakas:<ref name=fx5_ve2_566> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 1, 1;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, vii. 2.</ref> a special form of the text of the Rigveda evidently appertained to them.<ref name=fx6_ve2_566> ''Cf.'' the ''Māṇḍākeyīya adhyāya'' of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 6;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, viii. 11;<br> Scheftelowitz, ''Die Apokryphen des Rigveda,'' 12;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1907, 227;<br> ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 239;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 391.</ref>

मातरिश्वन्
<u>'''Mātariśvan'''</u> is mentioned in a [[वालखिल्य|Vālakhilya]] hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_567> Rv. viii. 52, 2.</ref> as a sacrificer along with '''[[मेध्य|Medhya]]''' and '''[[पृषध्र|Pṛṣadhra]].''' He seems to be mentioned also in one other passage, possibly in two.<ref name=fx2_ve2_567> Rv. x. 48, 2;<br> 105, 6. The former reference is much more probable than the latter.</ref> In the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_567> xvi. 11, 26;<br> Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 39, 40. The manuscripts vary between [[मातरिश्वन्|Mātariśvan]] and Mātariśva.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 163.</ref> a patron, '''[[पृषध्र|Pṛṣadhra]] [[मेध्य|Medhya]] [[मातरिश्वन्|Mātariśvan]]''' or '''Mātariśva''' is created by a misunderstanding of the Rigvedic text. 

मातुर्-भ्रात्र
<u>'''Mātur-bhrātra'''</u> is a curiously formed compound, occurring once in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_568> i. 6, 12.</ref> as a designation of the ‘maternal uncle,’ who in the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] period bears the name of '''[[मातुल|Mātula]].''' Thus little is heard of the maternal uncle in the Vedic period: it is not till the Epic<ref name=fx2_ve2_568> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 141.</ref> that traces appear of his prominence as compared with the paternal uncle (''pitṛvya''). This fact is significant for the ‘patriarchal’ character of the early Indian family organization.<ref name=fx3_ve2_568> Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 484, 586-588. ''Cf.'' also Rivers, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1907, 629 ''et seq.''</ref>

मातुल
<u>'''Mātula,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_569> This peculiarly formed word was presumably a dialectic form which made its way into the written speech.</ref> ‘maternal uncle,’ is found only in the Sūtras<ref name=fx2_ve2_569> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 24, 4, etc.</ref> and later.

मातृ
<u>'''Mātṛ'''</u> is the regular word for ‘mother’ from the Rigveda onwards,<ref name=fx1_ve2_570> i. 24, 1;<br> vii. 101, 3, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 21, etc.;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, etc.</ref> being a formation probably developed under the influence of an onomatopœtic word ''mā,''<ref name=fx2_ve2_570> Bo7htlingk and Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' note.</ref> used like Ambā<ref name=fx3_ve2_570> ''Cf.'' ''ambe ambike ambalike,'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 18, with variations in [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 19, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 12, 20;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 9, 6, 3;<br> also ''ambā ambāyavī, ambayā,'' in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 3.</ref> and '''[[नना|Nanā]].'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_570> Rv. ix. 112, 3 ('''[[उपलप्रक्षिणी|Upalaprakṣiṇī]]'''). See von Schroeder, ''Mysterium und Mimus,'' 412.</ref><br><br>The relations of wife and husband, as well as of mother and children, are treated under '''Pati.''' It remains only to add that details are given in the Sūtras<ref name=fx5_ve2_570> ''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 460, 476, 477.</ref> of the respectful attention paid to a mother, and of the ceremonies in which she is concerned. The mother also appears interested in the fate of her children as in the story of the sale of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]]''' for adoption by '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx6_ve2_570> vii. 18 ''seq. Cf.'' also Leist, ''Altarisches Jus Gentium,'' 104;<br> Jolly, ''Die Adoption in Indien,'' 16, 17.</ref> <br><br>In the household the mother ranked after the father (see '''[[पितृ|Pitṛ]]'''). Occasionally ''mātarā'' is used for ‘parents,’ as are also ''pitarā'' and ''mātarā pitarā''<ref name=fx7_ve2_570> Rv. iii. 33, 3;<br> vii. 2, 5, etc. For ''mātarā pitarā,'' see Rv. iv. 6, 7;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ix. 19.</ref> and ''mātā-pitaraḥ.''<ref name=fx8_ve2_570> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 3, 10, vi. 3, 11, 3.</ref>

मातृ-वध
<u>'''Mātṛ-vadha,'''</u> ‘matricide,’ is mentioned as a very grave crime in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iii. 1), but as one that can be expiated by the knowledge of the truth.<br>==Foot Notes==

मातृ-हन्
<u>'''Mātṛ-han,'''</u> ‘mother-killer,’ ‘matricide,’ occurs in a Vedic quotation mentioned by the commentator on Pāṇini.<ref name=fx1_ve2_572> Kāśikā Vṛtti on Pāṇīni, iii. 2, 88;<br> ''mātṛhā saptamaṃ narakaṃ praviśet.''</ref>

मात्रा
<u>'''Mātrā'''</u> in the Upaniṣads<ref name=fx1_ve2_573> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 2, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 1, 5;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, vii. 15.</ref> denotes a mora, the length of a short vowel.

मात्स्य
<u>'''1. Mātsya,'''</u> ‘prince of the [[मत्स्य|Matsya]] people.’ See '''[[मत्स्य|Matsya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

मात्स्य
<u>'''2. Mātsya'''</u> occurs in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_575> i. 5, 2, 1, where he serves [[यज्ञेषु|Yajñeṣu]] and [[शतद्युम्न|Śatadyumna]].</ref> as the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] skilled in sacrifice. Possibly,<ref name=fx2_ve2_575> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 681.</ref> but not probably, he may also be meant in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx3_ve2_575> xix. 39, 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 306.</ref>

माथव
<u>'''Māthava,'''</u> ‘descendant of Mathu,’ is the patronymic of '''[[विदेघ|Videgha]],''' perhaps ‘king of [[विदेह|Videha]],’ in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_576> i. 4, 1, 10. 17. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xli, 104, n. 1;<br> 26, xxix.;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 170.</ref> 

माधुकि
<u>'''Mādhuki,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Madhuka,''' is the patronymic of a teacher mentioned with disapproval in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_577> ii. 1, 4, 27. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 434.</ref>

माध्यंदिनायन
<u>'''Mādhyaṃdināyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[मध्यंदिन|Madhyaṃdina]],’ is the patronymic of a teacher mentioned in the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iv. 6, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

माध्यम
<u>'''Mādhyama'''</u> (‘relating to the middle’) is a term applied in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_579> xii. 3.</ref> and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx2_ve2_579> ii. 2, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 115, 389;<br> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 2;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 10, etc.</ref> to denote the ‘authors of the middle books’ (ii.-vii.) of the Rigveda.

मान
<u>'''1. Māna'''</u> as a measure of weight is said to be the equivalent of the '''[[कृष्णल|Kṛṣṇala]]''' or Raktikā--that is, the berry of the Guñjā (''Abrus precatorius''). It occurs in compounds in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_580> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 6, 3;<br> vi. 4, 10, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 7, 7;<br> 7, 6, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 3, 24;<br> 5, 5, 16, etc.</ref>

मान
<u>'''2. Māna'''</u> is the name of a man occurring in several passages of the Rigveda. In one place<ref name=fx1_ve2_581> Rv. i. 189, 8.</ref> express mention is made of his son (''[[सूनु|sūnu]]''), by whom, despite Bergaigne's view to the contrary,<ref name=fx2_ve2_581> ''Religion Védique,'' 2, 394. ''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 173;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 221, n. 5;<br> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 110;<br> Sieg. ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 107;<br> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 135.</ref> '''[[अगस्त्य|Agastya]]''' must be meant. In another passage,<ref name=fx3_ve2_581> vii. 33, 13. ''Cf.'' verse 10.</ref> apparently the same meaning applies to [[मान|Māna]]--that is, [[अगस्त्य|Agastya]] as ‘a [[मान|Māna]].’ In a third passage<ref name=fx4_ve2_581> i. 117, 11.</ref> the expression ''sūnave Mānena'' has been held by Sieg<ref name=fx5_ve2_581> ''Loc. cit.''</ref> to be an inversion of ''Mānasya sūnunā,'' ‘by the son of Māna’--''i.e.,'' [[अगस्त्य|Agastya]]; but it seems more likely<ref name=fx6_ve2_581> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten, loc. cit.''</ref> that either ''sūnor [[मान|Māna]]'' is the fuller form of Agastya's name (‘pride  of the son,’ with reference to his high ancestry), or that the son<ref name=fx7_ve2_581> Bergaigne, ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Pischel, ''loc. cit. Cf.'' Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' where ''sūnoḥ'' is taken as dependent on ''vājam.''</ref> of [[मान|Māna]] (= [[अगस्त्य|Agastya]]) is alluded to as interested in '''[[विश्पला|Viśpalā]].'''<br><br>The Mānas--that is, the descendants of [[मान|Māna]], are in several passages alluded to as singers.<ref name=fx8_ve2_581> Rv. i. 169, 8;<br> 171, 5;<br> 182, 8;<br> 184, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 116, 117, who thinks the Mānas were settled on the '''[[सिन्धु|Sindhu]]''' (Indus). See Rv. i. 186,5</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[मान्य|Mānya]], Māndārya.'''

मानव
<u>'''Mānava,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Manu,'''’<ref name=fx1_ve2_582> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 14, 2.</ref> is the patronymic of '''[[नाभानेदिष्ठ|Nābhānediṣṭha]]''' and of '''[[शार्यात|Śāryāta]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_582> ''Ibid.,'' iv. 32, 7. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 5, 2 ('''[[शर्यात|Śaryāta]]''').</ref>

मानवी
<u>'''Mānavī,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Manu,'''’ is the patronymic of the mythical Iḍā (‘oblation’) in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_583> i. 8, 1, 26;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 7, 3.</ref> and of a woman named '''[[पर्शु|Parśu]]''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_583> x. 86, 23.</ref>

मानु-तन्तव्य
<u>'''Mānu-tantavya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Manutantu,’ is the patronymic of '''Aikādaśākṣa''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (v. 30, 15). The Saumāpau Mānutantavyau, ‘two Saumāpas, descendants of Manutantu,’ are mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 5, 3, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

मान्थाल
<u>'''Mānthāla'''</u> is the form in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ii. 5, 8, 4) of the next name.<br>==Foot Notes==

मन्थालव
<u>'''Manthālava,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_586> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 19, where there is a variant Mātālava;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 38.</ref> '''Mānthīlava'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_586> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 18, 1.</ref> are the names in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās of a victim at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’). What it was is unknown: the commentator Mahīdhara<ref name=fx3_ve2_586> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> thinks it was a kind of mouse; Sāyaṇa explains it as a ‘water-cock’  (''jala-[[कुक्कुट|kukkuṭa]]''). Possiby, if Sāyaṇa's<ref name=fx4_ve2_586> On [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit. Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 86.</ref> version of the parallel word '''[[मन्थावल|Manthāvala]]''' is to be trusted, the ‘flying fox’ may be meant.<ref name=fx5_ve2_586> Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' and also ''s.v. māndhāla.''</ref>

मान्दार्य मान्य
<u>'''Māndārya Mānya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[मान|Māna]],'''’ is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_587> i. 165, 15 = i. 166, 15 = i. 167, 11 = i. 168, 10.</ref> It seems most probable that '''[[अगस्त्य|Agastya]]''' himself is meant.<ref name=fx2_ve2_587> ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 135;<br> Bergaigne, ''Religion Védique,'' 2, 394;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 221;<br> Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 107;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 183 ''et seq.,'' 206.</ref>

मान्य
<u>'''Mānya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[मान|Māna]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''Māndārya''' in several passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_588> See '''Māndārya,''' n. 1.</ref> being also found alone in others.<ref name=fx2_ve2_588> i. 165, 14;<br> 177, 5;<br> 184, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]'' 107.</ref> It probably denotes '''[[अगस्त्य|Agastya]].'''

मान्यमान
<u>'''Mānyamāna'''</u> occurs with the word '''Devaka''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_589> viii. 18, 20.</ref> The word seems to be a patronymic from Manyamāna, meaning ‘son of the proud one.’<ref name=fx2_ve2_589> Sāyaṇa takes Manyamāna as a proper name.</ref> Roth<ref name=fx3_ve2_589> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 264.</ref> renders the two words ‘the godling, the proudling (hast thou smitten).’

मामतेय
<u>'''Māmateya,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[ममता|Mamatā]],’ is the metronymic of '''[[दीर्घतमस्|Dīrghatamas]]''' in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_590> i. 147, 3;<br> 152, 6;<br> 158, 6.</ref> and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_590> viii. 23, 1;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 17. For [[ममता|Mamatā]], ''cf.'' Bṛhaddevatā, iii. 56;<br> iv. 11.</ref>

मायव
<u>'''Māyava,'''</u> ‘descendant of Mayu or [[मायु|Māyu]],’ is the patronymic of a patron in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_591> x. 93, 15.</ref> perhaps of '''[[राम|Rāma]],''' as Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve2_591> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 106.</ref> thinks. 

माय
<u>'''Māya'''</u> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 4, 3, 11) corresponds to '''[[असुरविद्या|Asuravidyā]],''' ‘magic.’<br>==Foot Notes==

मायु
<u>'''Māyu'''</u> denotes the ‘lowing’ of a cow and the ‘bleating’ of a sheep or goat in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_593> i. 164, 28 (cow);<br> vii. 103, 2 (cow);<br> x. 95, 3 (ewe);<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 9.</ref> as well as the ‘chattering’ of a monkey in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_593> vi. 38, 4;<br> xix. 49, 4 (called ''[[पुरुष|puruṣa]];<br> cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 85, 86;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. [[मायु|Māyu]]'').</ref>

मारुत
<u>'''Māruta,'''</u> ‘descendant of Marut,’ is the patronymic of '''Dyutāna''' and of '''Nitāna.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

मारुताश्व
<u>'''Mārutāśva,'''</u> ‘descendant of Marutāśva,’ is, according to Ludwig,<ref name=fx1_ve2_595> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 155. It may be a patronymic of '''Cyavatāna.'''</ref> the patronymic of a patron in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_595> v. 33, 9.</ref> The word may, however, be merely an adjective ‘having windswift horses.’

मार्गवेय
<u>'''Mārgaveya'''</u> is the patronymic or metronymic of '''[[राम|Rāma]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 27, 3. 4), where he is mentioned as a '''Śyāparṇa.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

मार्गार
<u>'''Mārgāra'''</u> is the name of one of the victims at the Paruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_597> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 16;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 12, 1.</ref> The sense of the word is apparently ‘hunter,’ or possibly ‘fisherman,’<ref name=fx2_ve2_597> ''Cf.'' Sāyaṇa on [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> as a patronymic from ''mṛgāri,'' ‘enemy of wild beasts.’

माल्य
<u>'''1. Mālya,'''</u> ‘garland,’ is found in the Upaniṣads.<ref name=fx1_ve2_598> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 2, 6;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 4, etc.</ref>

माल्य
<u>'''2. Mālya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Māla,’ is the patronymic of '''[[आर्य|Ārya]]''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 4, 11). <br>==Foot Notes==

माष
<u>'''Māṣa'''</u> is the name of a kind of bean (''Phaseolus radiatus'') in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_600> vi. 140, 2;<br> xii. 2, 53.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_600> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 8, 1;<br> vii. 2, 10, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 7;<br> xxxii. 7;<br> xxxvii. 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 12;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 1, 10;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 3, 22 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 3, 13 ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> It is still one of the most valuable of similar plants in India. The seeds<ref name=fx3_ve2_600> Later described as marked with black and grey spots. ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> were pounded (''[[पिष्ट|piṣṭa]]'') according to the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx4_ve2_600> xii. 2, 53. ''Ibid.,'' xii. 2, 4, an offering of crushed beans (''māṣājya'') is mentioned.</ref> These beans ripened in the winter (''[[हेमन्त|hemanta]]'').<ref name=fx5_ve2_600> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 2, 10, 2.</ref> In the ritual the human head for the sacrifice is bought for twenty-one Māṣas<ref name=fx6_ve2_600> ''Ibid.,'' v. 1, 8, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xx. 8.</ref> : it does not appear that the word here means a weight of metal, as it often does later.<ref name=fx7_ve2_600> Weber, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 18, 267. According to Manu, viii. 134, one [[माष|Māṣa]] is equivalent to five (erroneously stated as four above, vol. i., p. 185) '''Kṛṣṇalas.''' ''Cf.'' also St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 2.</ref> A taboo on beans is found in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx8_ve2_600> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxii. 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 4, 10. ''Cf.'' von Schroeder, ''Vienna Oriental Journal,'' 15, 187-212;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 587, 588. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 240.</ref>

मास्
<u>'''Mās'''</u> denotes rarely ‘moon,’<ref name=fx1_ve2_601> Rv. x. 12, 7. ''Cf.'' also the compound ''sūryā-māsā,'' ‘sun and moon,’ viii. 94, 2;<br> x. 64, 3;<br> 68, 10;<br> 92, 12;<br> 93, 5, which may, however, be formed from ''[[मास|māsa]]. Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 220, n. 20.</ref> and often ‘month’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_601> Rv. i. 25, 8;<br> iv. 18, 4;<br> v. 45, 7. 11;<br> vii. 91, 2, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx3_ve2_601> Av. viii. 10, 19;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 2, 2;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 4, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 9, 1, etc.</ref> See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''

मास
<u>'''Māsa'''</u> denotes a ‘month,’ a period of time repeatedly mentioned in the Rigveda and later.<br><br>The characteristic days (or rather nights) of the month were those of the new moon, Amā-vasyā, ‘home-staying (night),’ and ‘of the full moon,’ [[पौर्ण-मासी|Paurṇa-māsī]]. Two hymns of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_602> vii. 79 and 80. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 5, 1, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7, 5, 13, etc.</ref> celebrate these days respectively. A personification of the phases of the moon is seen in the four names [[सिनीवाली|Sinīvālī]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_602> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 8, 1;<br>  iii. 4, 9, 1;<br> Rv. ii. 32, 6;<br> Av. ii. 26, 2;<br> vi. 11, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xi. 55. 56;<br> xxxiv. 10;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 8;<br> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 6.</ref>  the day before new moon; [[कुहू|Kuhū]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_602> Av. vii. 47;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 8, 1;<br> iii. 4, 9, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 8, etc.</ref> also called Guṅgū,<ref name=fx4_ve2_602> Rv. ii. 32, 8, where Sāyaṇa identifies it with [[कुहू|Kuhū]].</ref> the new moon day; [[अनुमति|Anumati]],<ref name=fx5_ve2_602> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 8, 1;<br> iii. 4, 9, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxix. 60;<br> xxxiv. 8, 9;<br> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 6.</ref> the day before full moon; and [[राका|Rākā]],<ref name=fx6_ve2_602> Rv. ii. 32, 4;<br> v. 42, 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 8, 1;<br> iii. 4, 9, 1. ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], xi. 31;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 228 ''et seq.;<br>'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 189.</ref> the day of new moon. The importance of the new and full moon days is seen in the [[दर्श|Darśa]]-pūrṇamāsau, or festivals of the new and full moon days respectively.<br><br>One special day in the month, the '''[[एकाष्टका|Ekāṣṭakā]],''' or eighth day after full moon, was important. In the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx7_ve2_602> x. 3, 11. ''Cf.'' Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 2, 2, 23;<br> Av. xv. 16, 2.</ref> there are stated to be in the year twelve such, mentioned between the twelve days of full moon and the twelve days of new moon. But one [[एकाष्टका|Ekāṣṭakā]] is referred to in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās and elsewhere<ref name=fx8_ve2_602> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 8, 1;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], v. 9, 1. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 3, 8, 4;<br> iv. 3, 11, 3;<br> v. 7, 2, 2;<br> Av. iii. 10;<br> viii. 9, 10;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxix. 10;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 13, 21, etc. See Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 1, 2, with the commentary;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.,'' with Sāyaṇa's notes;<br> Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 341, 342;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 219 ''et seq.''</ref> as of quite special importance. This was, in the accordant opinion of most commentators, the eighth day after the full moon of '''Māgha.''' It marked the end of the year, or the beginning of the new year. Though the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx9_ve2_602> xix. 23.</ref> places the winter solstice in the new moon of Māgha, the latter date probably means the new moon preceding full moon in Māgha,<ref name=fx10_ve2_602> So Vināyaka on [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Ānartīya on [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 19, 1;<br> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 345, 346, 353, 354. Weber accepts the scholiasts’ view that Māgha is here regarded as beginning with the day after full moon in Taiṣa;<br> but it is simpler to suppose the meaning to be that Māgha is regarded as commencing with, not after, the new moon and ending with the day before new moon. Several passages in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (ii. 12;<br> iii. 1;<br> xxvi. 18;<br> xxx. 3;<br> see Caland, ''Über das vituelle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 36, 37) and [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 1, 1, 7, point to the full moon being the middle of the month, and the new moon being regarded as either the beginning or the end. Hopkins (n. 11) thinks [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 2, 2, 18, point to the commencement of the month with the full moon. If this could be accepted, then the [[अष्टका|Aṣṭakā]] would fall a week before the winter solstice in Māgha.</ref> not the new moon following  full moon; but it is perhaps possible to account adequately for the importance of the [[एकाष्टका|Ekāṣṭakā]] as being the first [[अष्टका|Aṣṭakā]] after the beginning of the new year.<br><br>It is not certain exactly how the month was reckoned, whether from the day after new moon to new moon--the system known as ''amānta,'' or from the day after full moon to full moon--the ''pūrṇimānta'' system, which later, at any rate, was followed in North India, while the other system prevailed in the south. Jacobi<ref name=fx11_ve2_602> ''Zeitschrfit der Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 49, 229, n. 1;<br> 50, 81. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 24, 20.</ref> argues that the year began in the full moon of Phālguna, and that only by the full moon's conjunction with the [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] could the month be known. Oldenberg<ref name=fx12_ve2_602> ''Ibid.,'' 48, 633, n. 1;<br> 49, 476, 477. This is the Epic rule, Hopkins, ''loc. cit.''</ref> points to the fact that the new moon is far more distinctively an epoch than the full moon; that the Greek, Roman, and Jewish years began with the new moon; and that the Vedic evidence is the division of the month into the former (''pūrva'') and latter (''apara'') halves, the first being the bright (''[[शुक्ल|śukla]]''), the second the dark (''[[कृष्ण|kṛṣṇa]]'') period. Thibaut<ref name=fx13_ve2_602> ''Indian Antiquary,'' 24, 87. None of the evidence is absolutely conclusive one way or the other. It is perfectly possible that the usage of families or districts differed. ''Cf.'' Thibaut, ''Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik,'' 12.</ref> considers that to assume the existence of the ''pūrṇimānta'' system for the Veda is unnecessary, though possible. Weber<ref name=fx10_ve2_602/> assumes that it occurs in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] as held by the scholiasts. But it would probably be a mistake to press that passage, or to assume that the ''amānta'' system was rigidly accepted in the Veda: it seems at least as probable that the month was vaguely regarded as beginning with the new moon day, so that new moon preceded full moon, which was in the middle, not the end or the beginning of the month.<br><br>That a month regularly had 30 days is established by the conclusive evidence of numerous passages in which the year is given 12 months and 360 days. This month is known from the earliest records, being both referred to directly and alluded to.<ref name=fx14_ve2_602> Rv. i. 164, 11. 14, 48;<br> x. 189, 3;<br> 190, 2;<br> Av. iv. 35, 4;<br> x. 7, 6;<br> 8, 23;<br> xiii. 3, 8, etc.</ref>  It is the regular month of the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx15_ve2_602> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 10, 8;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 12;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvi. 2, 3;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 1;<br> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxvi. 10;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 5, 22. See also Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 288;<br> Thibaut, ''Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik,'' 8.</ref> and must be regarded as the month which the Vedic Indian recognized. No other month is mentioned as such in the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] literature; it is only in the Sūtras that months of different length occur. The [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]] Sūtras<ref name=fx16_ve2_602> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 8, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[निदान|Nidāna]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], v. 11. 12;<br> Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 281-288.</ref> refer to (1) years with 324 days--''i.e.,'' periodic years with 12 months of 27 days each; (2) years with 351 days--''i.e.,'' periodic years with 12 months of 27 days each, plus another month of 27 days; (3) years with 354 days--''i.e.,'' 6 months of 30 days, and 6 with 29 days, in other words, lunar synodic years; (4) years with 360 days, or ordinary civil (''sāvana'') years; (5) years with 378 days, which, as Thibaut<ref name=fx17_ve2_602> ''Op. cit.,'' 8, 9.</ref> clearly shows, are third years, in which, after two years of 360 days each, 18 days were added to bring about correspondence between the civil year and the solar year of 366 days. But even the Sāmasūtras do not mention the year of 366 days, which is first known to the [[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]]<ref name=fx18_ve2_602> verse 28.</ref> and to [[गर्ग|Garga]].<ref name=fx19_ve2_602> Cited in the commentary on the [[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]], 10.</ref><br><br>That the Vedic period was acquainted with the year of 354 days cannot be affirmed with certainty. Zimmer,<ref name=fx20_ve2_602> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 365, 366.</ref> indeed, thinks that it is proved by the fact that pregnancy is estimated at ten months, or sometimes a year.<ref name=fx21_ve2_602> Ten months is the period according to Rv. v. 78, 7-9;<br> x. 184, 3;<br> Av. i. 11, 6;<br> iii. 23, 2;<br> v. 25, 13;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxviii. 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 5, 2, 4. 5 (''ibid.,'' ix. 5, 1, 63, a six months' embryo is alone able to live). A year is mentioned in [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], x. 1, 9 (ten months in vi. 1, 3);<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiii. 8;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 1, 3, 8;<br> xi. 5, 4, 6-11;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 22.</ref> But Weber<ref name=fx22_ve2_602> ''Naxatra,'' 2, 313, n. 1.</ref> may be right in holding that the month is the periodic month of 27 days, for the period is otherwise too long if a year is taken. On the other hand, the period of ten months quite well suits the period of gestation, if birth takes place in the tenth month, so that in this sense the month of 30 days may well be meant. <br><br>The year of 12 months of 30 days each being admittedly quite unscientific, Zimmer<ref name=fx23_ve2_602> ''Op. cit.,'' 369, 370.</ref> is strongly of opinion that it was only used with a recognition of the fact that intercalation took place, and that the year formed part of a greater complex, normally the five your Yuga or cycle. This system is well known from the Jyotṣa: it consists of 62 months of 29(16/31) days each = 1, 830 days (two of these months being intercalary, one in the middle and one at the end), or 61 months of 30 days, or 60 months of 30(1/2) days, the unit being clearly a solar year of 366 days. It is not an ideal system, since the year is too long;<ref name=fx24_ve2_602> The Yuga is too long by nearly four days. The true year has 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes, 46 seconds. ''Cf.'' Thibaut, ''op. cit.,'' 24, 25.</ref> but it is one which cannot be claimed even for the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] period, during which no decision as to the true length of the year seems to have been arrived at. The references to it seen by Zimmer in the Rigveda<ref name=fx25_ve2_602> i. 164, 14;<br> iii. 55, 18. These passages are, of course, obscure, but to interpret them as referring to the ten half years of the Yuga is particularly gratuitous.</ref> are not even reasonably plausible, while the ''pañcaka yuga,'' cited by him from the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx26_ve2_602> xvii. 13, 17. See also Thibaut, ''op. cit.,'' 7, 8;<br> Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 91, and references. The most that can be said is that a tendency to accept five years as a convenient period for intercalation was arising, which ultimately appears developed in the [[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]]. But we cannot say that a year of 366 days is known until then.</ref> occurs only in a quotation in a commentary, and had no authority for the text itself.<br><br>On the other hand, there was undoubtedly some attempt to bring the year of 360 days--a synodic lunar year--roughly into connexion with reality. A Sāmasūtra<ref name=fx27_ve2_602> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 8, has nothing of this, but [[निदान|Nidāna]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], v. 12, 2, 5, is quite clear.</ref> treats it as a solar year, stating that he sun perambulates each Naxatra in 13(1/3) days, while others again evidently interpolated 18 days every third year, in order to arrive at some equality. But Vedic literature, from the Rigveda<ref name=fx28_ve2_602> i. 25, 8;<br> perhaps 165, 15.</ref> downwards,<ref name=fx29_ve2_602> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 3, 1, 5;<br> vi. 2, 2, 29;<br> xii. 2, 1, 8;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 12;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 13;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], x. 3, 2;<br> xxiii. 2, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 4, 29;<br> Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 336, n. 1.</ref> teems with the assertion of the difficulty of ascertaining the month. The length is variously given as 30 days,<ref name=fx30_ve2_602> Av. xiii. 3, 8.</ref> 35 days,<ref name=fx31_ve2_602> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 5, 4, 5.</ref> or  36 days.<ref name=fx32_ve2_602> ''Ibid.,'' ix. 1, 1, 43;<br> 3, 3, 18. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 43, 167, n. 1. Shamasastry, ''Gavām Ayana,'' 122, interprets these passages in quite an impossible manner. There is no trace of a month of 35-36 days in the Epic: Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 24, 42.</ref> The last number possibly indicates an intercalation after six years (6×6 = 36, or for ritual purposes 35), but for this we have no special evidence. There are many references<ref name=fx33_ve2_602> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 6, 7, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxi. 5;<br> xxxiv. 9;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 10, 8;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 8;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 3, 27;<br> iii. 6, 4, 24;<br> v. 4, 5, 23;<br> vii. 2, 3, 9, etc.;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 10, 6.</ref> to the year having 12 or 13 months.<br><br>The names of the months are, curiously enough, not at all ancient. The sacrificial texts of the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] give them in their clearest form where the Agnicayana, ‘building of the fire-altar,’ is described.<ref name=fx34_ve2_602> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 4, 11, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 10;<br> xxxv. 9;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 8, 12;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 25;<br> xiv. 6. 15. 16 27;<br> xv. 57.</ref> These names are the following: (1) [[मधु|Madhu]], (2) Mādhava (spring months, ''vāsantikāv ṛtū''); (3) [[शुक्र|Śukra]], (4) Śuci (summer months, ''graiṣmāv ṛtū''); (5) Nabha (or Nabhas),<ref name=fx35_ve2_602> In Maitrāyaṇī, [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]], and Vājasaneyi Saṃhitās. See notes 34, 36.</ref> (6) Nabhasya (rainy months, ''vārṣikāv ṛtū''); (7) Iṣa, (8) Ūrja (autumn months, ''śāradāv ṛtū''); (9) Saha (or Sahas),<ref name=fx35_ve2_602/> (10) Sahasya (winter months, ''haimantikāv ṛtū''); (11) Tapa (or [[तपस्|Tapas]]),<ref name=fx35_ve2_602/> (12) Tapasya (cool months, ''śaiśirāv ṛtū'').<br><br>There are similar lists in the descriptions of the Soma sacrifice<ref name=fx36_ve2_602> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 4, 14, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 3, 16;<br> iv. 6, 7;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, iv. 7;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vii. 30 (where Iṣ and Ūrj appear as the names of the months).</ref> and of the horse sacrifice,<ref name=fx37_ve2_602> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 12, 13;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 31.</ref> all of them agreeing in essentials. There are other lists of still more fanciful names,<ref name=fx38_ve2_602> See, ''e.g.,'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 7, 9, 1;<br> iv. 7, 11, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā ix. 20;<br> xviii. 28;<br> xxii. 32;<br> Kāthaka Saṃhitā, xxxv. 10, Weber, 2, 349, 350.</ref> but these have no claim at all to represent actual divisions in popular use. It is doubtful if the list given above is more than a matter of priestly invention. Weber points out that [[मधु|Madhu]] and Mādhava later appear as names of spring, and that these two are mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx39_ve2_602> iv. 7, 2;<br> v. 6, 16.</ref> as if actually  employed; but the evidence is very inadequate to show that the other names of the months given in the list were in ordinary use.<ref name=fx40_ve2_602> Cases like that of ''nabhas,'' used by Mallinātha on Meghadūta, i. 4, are merely scholastic.</ref><br><br>In some of these lists the intercalary month is mentioned. The name given to it in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx41_ve2_602> vii. 30;<br> xxii. 31.</ref> is [[अंहसस्पति|Aṃhasaspati]], while that given in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]]<ref name=fx42_ve2_602> i. 4, 14, 1.</ref> and Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitās<ref name=fx43_ve2_602> iii. 12, 13.</ref> is [[संसर्प|Saṃsarpa]]. The [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx44_ve2_602> xxxviii. 4.</ref> gives it the name of [[मलिम्लुच|Malimluca]], which also occurs elsewhere, along with [[संसर्प|Saṃsarpa]], in one of the lists of fanciful names.<ref name=fx45_ve2_602> ''Ibid.,'' xxxv. 10;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃitā, xxii. 30.</ref> The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx46_ve2_602> v. 6, 4.</ref> describes it as ''[[सनिस्रस|sanisrasa]],'' ‘slipping,’ owing no doubt to its unstable condition.<br><br>The other method of naming the months is from the '''Nakṣatras.''' It is only beginning to be used in the Brāhmaṇas, but is found regularly in the Epic and later. The [[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]]<ref name=fx47_ve2_602> Verse 6 [[यजुस्|Yajus]] recension = verse 5 Ṛc recension: Weber, 2, 354 ''et seq.''</ref> mentions that Māgha and Tapa were identical: this is the fair interpretation of the passage, which also involves the identification of [[मधु|Madhu]] with [[चैत्र|Caitra]], a result corresponding with the view frequently found in the Brāhmaṇas, that the full moon in [[चित्रा|Citrā]], and not that in [[फल्गुनी|Phalgunī]], is the beginning of the year.<ref name=fx48_ve2_602> Weber's theory (359) that [[चैत्र|Caitra]] was as the first spring month secondary to Phālguna is, of course, an error;<br> for, owing to the precession of the equinoxes, Phālguna became the first month of spring ''de facto,'' while [[चैत्र|Caitra]] became virtually the last month of the preceding season. The truth is that the six seasons are an arbitrary division of the year, and that either Phālguna or [[चैत्र|Caitra]] could be regarded as the beginning of spring without much impropriety. See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 457;<br> 10, 231, 232;<br> Whitney, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 8, 71, 397, 398.</ref><br><br>In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx49_ve2_602> viii. 4, 2, 12;<br> 3, 18. See Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiv. 26. 31. The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 10, 3, has the words in the form of ''[[याव|yāva]]'' and ''ayāva,'' which are explained in v. 3, 4, 5.</ref> are found two curious expressions, ''yava'' and ''ayava,'' for the light and dark halves of the month, which is clearly considered to begin with the light half. Possibly the words are derived, as Eggling<ref name=fx50_ve2_602> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 43, 69, n.</ref> thinks, from ''yu,'' ‘ward off,’ with reference to evil spirits. The word '''[[पर्वन्|Parvan]]'''  (‘joint’ = division of time) probably<ref name=fx51_ve2_602> The months and the half months are the ''parvāṇi'' of the sacrificial horse in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 1, 1. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 35;<br> vi. 2, 2, 24;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 43;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 4, where the sense is left vague.</ref> denotes a half of the month, perhaps already in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx52_ve2_602> i. 94, 4. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 189.</ref> More precisely the first half, the time of the waxing light, is called ''[[पूर्व-पक्ष|pūrva-pakṣa]],''<ref name=fx53_ve2_602> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 9, 6;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 25, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 7, 4, 7;<br> viii. 4, 2, 11;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 11,;<br> xi. 5. 6.</ref> the second, that of the waning light, ''apara-[[पक्ष|pakṣa]],''<ref name=fx54_ve2_602> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 7, 4, 7;<br> viii. 4, 2, 11;<br> xi. 1, 5, 3;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 1, 5;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 11;<br> xi. 6, etc.</ref> Either of these might be called a half-month (''ardha-[[मास|māsa]]'').<ref name=fx55_ve2_602> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 5, 21;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 1, 1;<br> iii. 8, 9 etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 15, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 12, 7;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 28.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 364 ''et seq.;<br>'' Thibaut, ''Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik,'' 7-9;<br> Weber, Proceedings of the Berlin Academy, 1894, 37 ''et seq.;<br> Naxatra,'' 2, ''passim.''</ref>

मासर
<u>'''Māsara'''</u> is mentioned as a beverage in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_603> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 2. 9;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 14. 82;<br> xx. 68;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 11, 4, etc.</ref> Its composition is described fully in the Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_603> xix. 1, 20. 21;<br> Mahīdhara on Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 1, 14.<br><br>''Cf.'' Griffith, Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, 172, n.</ref> It seems to have been a mixture of rice and '''[[श्यामाक|Śyāmāka]]''' with grass, parched barley, etc.

माहकि
<u>'''Māhaki,'''</u> ‘descendant of Mahaka,’ is the patronymic of a teacher in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_604> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 382.</ref>

माहा-चमस्य
<u>'''Māhā-camasya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Mahācamasa,'''’ is the patronymic of a teacher to whom the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx1_ve2_605> i. 5, 1.</ref> ascribes the addition of Mahas to the triad Bhūr '''Bhuvas''' Svar.<ref name=fx2_ve2_605> ''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 180.</ref>

माहा-रजन
<u>'''Māhā-rajana,'''</u> ‘dyed with saffron’ (''mahā-rajana''), is applied to a garment ('''[[वासस्|Vāsas]]''') in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (ii. 3, 10). <br>==Foot Notes==

माहा-राज्य
<u>'''Māhā-rājya,'''</u> ‘the dignity of a great king’ (''[[महा-राज|mahā-rāja]]''), is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 6, 5; 12, 4; 15, 3).<br>==Foot Notes==

माहित्थि
<u>'''Māhitthi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Mahittha,’ is the patronymic of a teacher mentioned several times in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_608> vi. 2, 2, 10;<br> viii. 6, 1, 16 ''et seq.;<br>'' ix. 5, 1, 57;<br> x. 6, 5, 9.</ref> He is said to be a pupil of '''[[वामकक्षायण|Vāmakakṣāyaṇa]]''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_608> vi. 5, 4 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref>

माहीन
<u>'''Māhīna'''</u> occurs in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_609> x. 60, 1. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 138.</ref> which celebrates '''Asamāti''' as a king. The word, used in the plural, may be a patronymic referring to the priests who praised Asamāti, or it may be an adjective of uncertain meaning.

मित्र
<u>'''Mitra'''</u> denotes ‘friend’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_610> Masculine: i. 58, 1;<br> 67, 1;<br> 75, 4;<br> 156, 1;<br> 170, 5;<br> ii. 4, 1. 3, etc. The neuter does not with certainty occur in the sense of ‘friend’ in the Rv.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_610> Masculine: Av. v. 19, 15;<br> xi. 9, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxvii. 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, x. 80. Neuter: [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 4, 8, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 8, 7;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 20, 17;<br> viii. 27, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 4, 8;<br> v. 3, 5, 13;<br> xi. 4, 3, 20, etc.</ref> According to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve2_610> vi. 2, 9, 2.</ref> a wife is a man's friend, and in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_610> i. 5, 3, 17.</ref> the value of a friend is insisted upon. Treachery to a friend is reprobated.<ref name=fx5_ve2_610> ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 1, 7.</ref>

मित्र-भू काश्यप
<u>'''Mitra-bhū Kāśyapa'''</u> (‘descendant of Kaśyapa’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[विभण्डक काश्यप|Vibhaṇḍaka Kāśyapa]],''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_611> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 374.</ref>

मित्र-भूति लौहित्य
<u>'''Mitra-[[भूति|bhūti]] Lauhitya'''</u> (‘descendant of Lohita’) is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]''' (iii. 42, 1) as a pupil of '''Kṛṣṇadatta [[लौहित्य|Lauhitya]].''' <br>==Foot Notes==

मित्र-वर्चस् स्थैरकायण
<u>'''Mitra-varcas Sthairakāyaṇa'''</u> (‘descendant of Sthiraka’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[सुप्रतीत औलुण्ड्य|Supratīta Auluṇḍya]],''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_613> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref>

मित्र-विन्द काश्यप
<u>'''Mitra-vinda Kāśyapa'''</u> (‘descendant of Kaśyapa’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''Sunītha,''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_614> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref>

मित्रातिथि
<u>'''Mitrātithi'''</u> is mentioned in one hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_615> x. 33, 7. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 165;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 150, 184;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1910, 922, 923;<br> Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 384;<br> Bṛhaddevatā, vii. 35, 36, with Macdonell's notes.</ref> as the father of '''Kuruśravaṇa''' and the grandfather of '''[[उपमश्रवस्|Upamaśravas]],''' all being evidently kings.

मुक्षीजा
<u>'''Mukṣījā'''</u> is found in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_616> i. 125, 2;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 19. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 244.</ref> where the sense seems clearly to be ‘net’ for catching animals. ''Cf.'' '''Padi.'''

मुञ्ज
<u>'''1. Muñja'''</u> denotes a grass, the ''Saccharum [[मुञ्ज|Muñja]],'' which is of luxuriant growth, attaining to a height of ten feet. It is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_617> i. 191, 3.</ref> along with other kinds of grasses as the lurking-place of venomous creatures. In the same text<ref name=fx2_ve2_617> i. 161, 8 (''[[मुञ्ज|muñja]]-nejana,'' which Sāyaṇa explains as ''apagata-[[तृण|tṛṇa]],'' ‘with the grass removed’).</ref> the [[मुञ्ज|Muñja]] grass is spoken of as purifying, apparently being used as the material of a filter for Soma. The grass is often mentioned in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx3_ve2_617> Av. i. 2, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 9, 5;<br> 10, 5, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx4_ve2_617> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xviii. 7;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 3, 3, 16;<br> vi. 6, 1, 23;<br> 2, 15. 16, etc. ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. mauñja.''</ref> It is in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_617> vi. 3, 1, 26.</ref> said to be ‘hollow’ (''suṣira'') and to be used for the plaited part of the throne ('''[[आसन्दी|Āsandī]]''').<ref name=fx6_ve2_617> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 8, 3, 6. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 72.</ref> 

मुञ्ज साम-श्रवस
<u>'''2. Muñja Sāma-śravasa'''</u> (‘descendant of Sāmaśravas’) is the name of a man, possibly a king, mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_618> iii. 5, 2.</ref> and the Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_618> iv. 1 (''Indische Studien,'' 1, 39).</ref>

मुण्डिभ औदन्य
<u>'''Muṇḍibha Audanya'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_619> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 5, 4. Apparently the word is a patronymic, ‘son of Udanya’ (so Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 341, n. 1), or ‘son of Odana’ (so St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'').</ref> or '''Audanyava'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_619> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 9, 15, 3 (‘descendant of Udanyu’).</ref> is the name of a man in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_619/> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_619/>

मुद्ग
<u>'''Mudga,'''</u> denoting a kind of bean (''Phascolus Mungo''), occurs in a list of vegetables in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve2_620> xviii. 12.</ref> A ‘soup of rice with beans’ (''mudgaudana'') is mentioned in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx2_ve2_620> xii. 8.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 240.</ref> and the Sūtras. ''Cf.'' perhaps '''[[मुद्गल|Mudgala]].'''

मुद्गल
<u>'''Mudgala'''</u> and '''Mudgalanī,''' ‘Mudgala's wife,’ both figure in a hopelessly obscure hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_621> x. 102.</ref> variously interpreted by Pischel<ref name=fx2_ve2_621> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 124.</ref> and Geldner<ref name=fx3_ve2_621> ''Ibid.,'' 1, 138;<br> 2, 1-22.</ref> and von Bradke<ref name=fx4_ve2_621> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 46, 445 ''et seq.''</ref> as telling of a real chariot race in which, despite difficulties, [[मुद्गल|Mudgala]] won by his wife's aid. The Indian tradition is as variant as the interpretations of modern authorities. Ṣaḍguruśiṣya<ref name=fx5_ve2_621> Macdonell's edition of the Sarvānukramaṇī, p. 158.</ref> explains that Mudgala's oxen were stolen, that he pursued the thieves with the one old ox he had left, and that hurling his hammer (''[[द्रु-घण|dru-ghaṇa]]'') he caught the marauders. [[यास्क|Yāska]],<ref name=fx6_ve2_621> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 23, 24.</ref> on the other hand, says that [[मुद्गल|Mudgala]] won a race with a ''[[द्रुघण|drughaṇa]]'' and an ox instead of with two oxen. It is pretty clear that, as Roth<ref name=fx7_ve2_621> ''[[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], Erlänterungen,'' 129.</ref> observed, the tradition is merely a guess, and a bad one, at the meaning of an obscure hymn, and this view is  accepted by Oldenberg.<ref name=fx8_ve2_621> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 39, 78.</ref> Bloomfield<ref name=fx9_ve2_621> ''Ibid.,'' 48, 547.</ref> has interpreted the legend as one of heavenly, not of human, events. [[मुद्गल|Mudgala]], probably a variant form of Mudgara,<ref name=fx10_ve2_621> According to Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 1, Indrasenā in x. 102, 2, is the name of Mudgalānī;<br> but its sense, ‘Indra's bolt,’ rather indicates the mythical character of the passage.</ref> which in the later language means a hammer or a similar weapon, may be meant as a personfication of the thunderbolt of Indra, rather than a real man.<ref name=fx11_ve2_621> If the name means a real man, it may be connected with '''[[मुद्ग|Mudga]],''' ‘bean.’ See Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 240.</ref> Later<ref name=fx12_ve2_621> Av. iv. 29, 6;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 12;<br> Bṛhaddevatā, vi. 46;<br> viii. 12. 90.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 166, 167;<br> Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 280;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society'' 1911, 1005, n. 1.</ref> [[मुद्गल|Mudgala]] is a mythical sage.

मुनि
<u>'''Muni'''</u> occurs in one hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_622> x. 136, 2. 4. 5. In verse I he is described as ‘long-haired.’</ref> where it seems to denote an ascetic of magic powers with divine afflatus (''deveṣita''), the precursor of the strange ascetics of later India. This agrees with the fact that '''[[ऐतश|Aitaśa]],''' the Muni, is in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_622> vi. 33, 3.</ref> regarded by his son as deranged, a view not unjustified if the nonsense which passes as the Aitaśapralāpa.<ref name=fx3_ve2_622> See Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 98 ''et seq.''</ref> ‘Chatter of [[ऐतश|Aitaśa]],’ was really his. The Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve2_622> viii. 17, 14. ''Cf.'' vii. 56, 8;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 376.</ref> calls Indra the ‘friend of Munis,’ and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx5_ve2_622> vii. 74, 1. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 440;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 5, 2, 15, and '''[[मुनिमरण|Munimaraṇa]].'''</ref> refers to a ‘divine Muni’ (''deva muni''), by whom a similar ascetic may be meant.<br><br>In the Upaniṣads<ref name=fx6_ve2_622> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 4, 1;<br> iv. 4, 25;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 20.</ref> the Muni is of a more restrained type: he is one who learns the nature of the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], the Absolute, by study, or sacrifice, or penance, or fasting, or faith (''śraddhā''). It must not of course be thought that there is any absolute distinction between the older Muni and the later: in both cases the man is in a peculiar ecstatic condition, but the ideal of the Upaniṣads is less material than the earlier picture of the Muni, who is more of a ‘medicine man’ than a sage. Nor would it be wise to conclude from the comparative rareness  of the mention of the Muni in the Vedic texts that he was an infrequent figure in Vedic times: he was probably not approved by the priests who followed the ritual, and whose views were essentially different from the ideals of a Muni, which were superior to earthly considerations, such as the desire for children and '''Dakṣiṇās.'''<ref name=fx7_ve2_622> ''Cf.'' Bṛhadāranyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 4, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 406;<br> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 49, 480;<br> ''Buddha,''^5 36.</ref>

मुनि-मरण
<u>'''Muni-maraṇa,'''</u> ‘Saints’ Death,’ is the name of the place where, according to the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiv. 4, 7), the '''Vaikhanasas''' were slain.<br>==Foot Notes==

मुलालिन्
<u>'''Mulālin'''</u> (masc.) or '''Mulālī''' (fem.) is the name of some part of an edible lotus (perhaps the ''Nymphaea esculenta'') in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_624> iv. 34. 5. ''Cf.'' [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], lxvi. 10;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 138;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 70;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 207.</ref>

मुषीवन्
<u>'''Muṣīvan'''</u> denotes ‘robber’ in one passage of the Rigveda (i. 42, 3).<br>==Foot Notes==

मुष्कर
<u>'''Muṣkara'''</u> occurs in one passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_626> vi. 14, 2.</ref> possibly in the sense of a small animal or insect, as suggested by Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve2_626> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> who, however, thought the passage corrupt. Bloomfield<ref name=fx3_ve2_626> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 463, 464.<br><br>''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 297.</ref> suggests that the reading of the Paippalāda text ''puṣkaram,'' (‘blue lotus’) is the correct form.

मुष्टि-हन्
<u>'''Muṣṭi-han,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_627> Rv. v. 58, 4;<br> vi. 26, 2;<br> viii. 20, 20;<br> Av. v. 22, 4.</ref> '''Muṣṭi-hatyā,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_627> Rv. i. 8, 2.</ref> in the Rigveda and the Atharvaveda denote. respectively, the ‘hand to hand fighter’--that is, the ordinary warrior as opposed to the charioteer, and the  ‘fight’ itself. So also in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_627> vii. 62, 1.</ref> the charioteer (''[[रथिन्|rathin]]'') is opposed to the foot-soldier (''[[पत्ति|patti]]''), and in the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve2_627> i. 100, 10.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 297.</ref> the chariots are opposed to the troops (''[[ग्राम|grāma]]'') of the infantry. The parallel of the Greek and other Āryan races shows that the Kṣatriyas were the fighters from chariots, while the ordinary host fought on foot.

मुसल
<u>'''Musala'''</u> denotes a ‘pestle’ in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_628> Av. x. 9, 26;<br> xi. 3, 3;<br> xii. 3, 13;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 8, 3, etc.</ref> and in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_628> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 8;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 5, 2, 7;<br> in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 42, 44 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 235, 237), ''musalin'' means a ‘man armed with a club.’</ref>

मुहूर्त
<u>'''Muhūrta'''</u> denotes a division of time, one-thirtieth of a day, or an hour of forty-eight minutes, in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_629> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 10, 1, 1 (for the names);<br> 9, 7;<br> 12, 9, 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 4, 2, 18. 25. 27;<br> 3, 20;<br> xii. 3, 2, 5;<br> x. 4, 4, 4, etc.</ref> In the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_629> iii. 33, 5;<br> 53, 8. The sense of ‘moment’ is also common in the Brāhmaṇas.<br><br>''Cf. Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 9, 139 ''et seq.;<br> Indische Streifen,'' 1, 92 ''et seq.''</ref> the sense of ‘moment’ only is found. ''Cf.'' '''Ahan.'''

मूचीप
<u>'''Mūcīpa'''</u> or '''Mūvīpa''' is the variant in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xv. 26, 6) of the '''[[मूतिब|Mūtiba]]''' of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] as the name of a barbarian tribe.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 67, n. 1.<br>==Foot Notes==

मूजवन्त्
<u>'''Mūjavant'''</u> is the name of a people who, along with the '''Mahāvṛṣas,''' the '''Gandhāris,''' and the '''Balhikas,''' are mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_631> v. 22, 5, 7, 8. 14. ''Cf.'' [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 5.</ref> as dwelling far away, and to whom fever is to be banished. Similarly in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx2_ve2_631> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 6, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ix. 7;<br> xxxvi. 14;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 4, 10. 20;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 61;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 2, 17.</ref> the Mūjavants are chosen as a type of distant folk, beyond  which Rudra with his bow is entreated to depart. In the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_631> x. 34, 1.</ref> Soma is described as [[मौजवत|Maujavata]], ‘coming from the Mūjavants,’ or, as [[यास्क|Yāska]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_631> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 8.</ref> takes it, ‘from Mount [[मूजवन्त्|Mūjavant]].’ The Indian commentators<ref name=fx5_ve2_631> Mahīdhara on Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Sāyaṇa on Rv. i. 161, 8;<br> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] and [[प्रयोग|Prayoga]], cited by Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 63.</ref> agree with [[यास्क|Yāska]] in taking [[मूजवन्त्|Mūjavant]] as the name of a mountain, and though Hillebrandt<ref name=fx6_ve2_631> ''Op. cit.,'' 1, 65.</ref> is justified in saying that the identification of [[मूजवन्त्|Mūjavant]] by Zimmer<ref name=fx7_ve2_631> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 29.</ref> with one of the lower hills on the south-west of Kaśmīr lacks evidence, it is not reasonable to deny that [[मूजवन्त्|Mūjavant]] was a hill from which the people took their name. [[यास्क|Yāska]]<ref name=fx8_ve2_631> ''Loc. cit. Cf.'' Siddhānta Kaumudī on Pāṇini, iv. 4, 110, where instead of [[मौजवत|Maujavata]] in Rv. x. 34, 1, Mauñjavata is read.</ref> suggests that [[मूजवन्त्|Mūjavant]] is equivalent to Muñjavant, which actually occurs later, in the Epic,<ref name=fx9_ve2_631> Mahābhārata, x. 785;<br> xiv. 180.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 198.</ref> as the name of a mountain in the Himālaya.

मूत
<u>'''Mūta'''</u> in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_632> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvi. 14;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 10, 5;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 3, 8.</ref> denotes a ‘woven basket.’ Mūtaka means a ‘small basket.’<ref name=fx2_ve2_632> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 2, 17.</ref>

मूतिब
<u>'''Mūtiba'''</u> appears in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_633> vii. 18, 2.</ref> as the name of one of the barbarous peoples enumerated as nominally '''Viśvāmitra's''' outcast offspring. The [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_633> xv. 26, 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 358, 483.</ref> gives the name as '''[[मूचीप|Mūcīpa]]''' or '''Mūvīpa.'''

मूल
<u>'''Mūla, Mūlabarhaṇa.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

मूस्
<u>'''Mūs,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_635> Rv. i. 105, 8 = x. 33, 3;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iv. 5.</ref> '''Mūṣikā,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_635> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 17;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 36.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 85;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 248.</ref> are the names of ‘mouse’ occurring in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_635/> and the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx2_ve2_635/> 

मृग
<u>'''1. Mṛga'''</u> has the generic sense of ‘wild beast’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_636> i. 173, 2;<br> 191, 4;<br> viii. 1, 20;<br> 5, 36;<br> x. 146, 6, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_636> Av. iv. 3, 6;<br> x. 1, 26;<br> xii. 1, 48 (''[[सूकर|sūkara]],'' ‘boar’);<br> xix. 38, 2;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 7, 10;<br> xxiv. 11, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 31, 2;<br> viii. 23, 3, etc.</ref> Sometimes it is qualified by the epithet ‘terrible’ (''bhīma''),<ref name=fx3_ve2_636> Rv. i. 154, 2;<br> 190, 3;<br> ii. 33, 11;<br> 34, 1;<br> x. 180, 2, etc.</ref> which indicates that a savage wild beast is meant. Elsewhere the buffalo is shown to be denoted by the epithet ''[[महिष|mahiṣa]],''<ref name=fx4_ve2_636> Rv. viii. 69, 15;<br> ix. 92, 6;<br> x. 123, 4.</ref> ‘powerful,’ which later becomes the name of the buffalo. More particularly the word has the sense of an animal of the gazelle type.<ref name=fx5_ve2_636> Rv. i. 38, 5;<br> 105, 7;<br> vi. 75, 11;<br> ix. 32, 4;<br> Av. v. 21, 4 (not a certain instance);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 3, 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 5 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 8, 4, 3, etc.</ref> In some passages<ref name=fx6_ve2_636> Rv. i. 182, 7;<br> x. 136, 6, and perhaps i. 145, 5;<br> vii. 87, 6.</ref> Roth<ref name=fx7_ve2_636> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' 1''e.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' i. 99;<br> 2, 122.</ref> sees the sense of ‘bird.’ See also '''[[मृग हस्तिन्|Mṛga Hastin]], [[पुरुष हस्तिन्|Puruṣa Hastin]].'''

मृग
<u>'''2. Mṛga'''</u> in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_637> iii. 33, 5.</ref> denotes, according to Sāyaṇa's commentary, the constellation '''[[मृगशिरस्|Mṛgaśiras]].''' But it seems more probable<ref name=fx2_ve2_637> See Whitney, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, xcii.</ref> that [[मृग|Mṛga]] there really covers the whole of Orion, not merely the inconspicuous group of stars in the head of Orion that make up the [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] [[मृगशिरस्|Mṛgaśiras]], but also the star ''a'' in his shoulder, which is reckoned as [[आर्द्रा|Ārdrā]], and  in his left shoulder. Tilak,<ref name=fx3_ve2_637> ''Orion,'' 99 ''et seq.''</ref> however, makes [[मृग|Mṛga]] or [[मृगशिरस्|Mṛgaśiras]] into a different group, consisting of the belt of Orion, with two stars in the knees and one in the left shoulder, which he deems to resemble a deer's head with an arrow through it, an implausible and unlikely theory. ''Cf.'' '''[[मृगव्याध|Mṛgavyādha]].'''

मृग हस्तिन्
<u>'''3. Mṛga Hastin,'''</u> the ‘animal with a hand,’ is mentioned in two passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_638> i. 64, 7;<br> iv. 16, 14.</ref> in which Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_638> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], Erläuterungen,'' 79.</ref> recognizes that the elephant is meant, but concludes that the compound name  is a proof of the newness of the elephant to the Vedic Indians.<ref name=fx3_ve2_638> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 99, 100, combats the view that the eler hant was new to the Vedic Indian, because of the similar use of ''[[मृग|mṛga]] [[महिष|mahiṣa]]'' and ''[[मृग|mṛga]] [[सूकर|sūkara]]'' (Av. xii. 1, 48) to denote the ‘buffalo’ and the ‘boar’ respectively. But '''[[महिष|Mahiṣa]]''' seems rather to bear out Roth's conclusion;<br> while '''[[सूकर|Sūkara]]''' appears alone in the Rigveda, and ''[[मृग|mṛga]] [[सूकर|sūkara]],'' ‘wild hog,’ seems to be used in one passage of the Av. (xii. 1, 48) to distinguish it from '''[[वराह|Varāha]],''' ‘boar,’ in the same verse.</ref> Later the adjective [[हस्तिन्|Hastin]] alone became the regular name of the animal (like '''[[महिष|Mahiṣa]]''' of the ‘buffalo’). The elephant is also denoted in the Rigveda by the descriptive term [[मृग|Mṛga]] [[वारण|Vāraṇa]],<ref name=fx4_ve2_638> Rv. viii. 33, 8;<br> x. 40, 8.</ref> the ‘wild or dangerous animal,’ the adjective ''[[वारण|vāraṇa]]'' similarly becoming one of the names for ‘elephant’ in the later language. Pischel's view<ref name=fx5_ve2_638> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 121-123;<br> 317319. ''Cf.'' Strabo, pp. 704, 705;<br> Arrian, ''Indica,'' 13. 14 (from Megasthenes).</ref> that the catching of elephants by the use of tame female elephants is already alluded to in the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve2_638> viii. 2, 6;<br> x. 40, 8.</ref> seems very doubtful. In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx7_ve2_638> viii. 23, 3 (''hiraṇyena parīvṛtān kṛṣṇāñ chukladato mṛgān''). See Pischel, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 122.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 80.</ref> elephants are described as ‘black, white-toothed, adorned with gold.’

मृगय
<u>'''Mṛgaya'''</u> occurs in several passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_639> iv. 16, 13;<br> viii. 3, 19;<br> x. 49, 5.</ref> as defeated by Indra. That he was a human foe, as Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve2_639> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 166.</ref> thinks, seems unlikely: more probably he was a demon, as [[मृग|Mṛga]] unquestionably is.<ref name=fx3_ve2_639> Rv. i. 80, 7;<br> v. 29, 4, etc.</ref>

मृगयु
<u>'''Mṛgayu,'''</u> ‘hunter,’ occurs in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_640> Av. x. 1, 26;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 27;<br> xxx. 7, etc. ''Cf. mṛgaṇyu,'' Rv. x. 40, 4.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx2_ve2_640> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 1, 1;<br> iii. 4, 3, 1;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 9, 12, etc.</ref> but not very often. The Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve2_640> xxx.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx4_ve2_640> iii. 4.</ref> however, in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) include a number of names which seem to be those of persons who make a livelihood by fishing or by hunting, such as the '''[[मार्गार|Mārgāra]],''' ‘hunter,’  the '''[[कैवर्त|Kaivarta]]''' or '''[[केवर्त|Kevarta]], [[पौञ्जिष्ठ|Pauñjiṣṭha]], Daśa, [[मैनाल|Maināla]],''' ‘fisher man,’ and perhaps the '''[[बैन्द|Bainda]]''' and the Ānda,<ref name=fx5_ve2_640> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 16;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 12, 1.</ref> who seem to have been some sort of fishermen.<br><br>It is not probable that even in the earliest Vedic period hunting formed the main source of livelihood for any of the Vedic tribes: pastoral pursuits and agriculture ('''[[कृषि|Kṛṣi]]''') were, no doubt, the mainstay of their existence. But it would be unreasonable to suppose that not much hunting was done, both for recreation and for purposes of food, as well as for protection of flocks from wild beasts. The Rigveda is naturally our chief source of information in regard to hunting. The arrow was sometimes employed,<ref name=fx6_ve2_640> Rv. ii. 42, 2.</ref> but, as is usual with primitive man, the normal instruments of capture were nets and pitfalls. Birds were regularly caught in nets ('''[[पाश|Pāśa]],'''<ref name=fx7_ve2_640> '''[[पाशिन्|Pāśin]],''' ‘hunter,’ Rv. iii. 45, 1.</ref> '''[[निधा|Nidhā]],'''<ref name=fx8_ve2_640> Rv. ix. 83, 4;<br> x. 73, 11.</ref> '''[[जाल|Jāla]]'''),<ref name=fx9_ve2_640> Av. x. 1, 30.</ref> The bird-catcher being called ''[[निधा|nidhā]]-pati,''<ref name=fx10_ve2_640> Rv. ix. 83, 4.</ref> ‘master of snares.’ The net was fastened on pegs<ref name=fx11_ve2_640> Av. viii. 8, 5.</ref> (as is done with modern nets for catching birds). Another name of net is apparently '''[[मुक्षीजा|Mukṣījā]].'''<br><br>Pits were used for catching antelopes ('''[[ऋश्य|Ṛśya]]'''), and so were called ''[[ऋश्य|ṛśya]]-da,''<ref name=fx12_ve2_640> Rv. x. 39, 8.</ref> ‘antelope-catching.’ Elephants were captured as in Greek times, perhaps through the instrumentality of tame females (see '''[[मृग हस्तिन्|Mṛga Hastin]]'''). Apparently the boar was captured in the chase, dogs being used,<ref name=fx13_ve2_640> Rv. x. 86, 4.</ref> but the passage from which this view is deduced is of uncertain mythological content. There is also an obscure reference<ref name=fx14_ve2_640> Rv. x. 51, 6.</ref> to the capture of the buffalo ('''[[गौर|Gaura]]'''), but it is not clear whether the reference is to shooting with an arrow or capturing by means of ropes, perhaps a lasso, or a net. The lion was captured in pitfalls,<ref name=fx15_ve2_640> Rv. x. 28, 10.</ref> or was surrounded by the hunters and slain;<ref name=fx16_ve2_640> Rv. v. 15, 3.</ref> one very obscure passage refers to the lion being caught by ambuscade, which perhaps merely alludes to the use of the hidden pit.<ref name=fx17_ve2_640> Rv. v. 74, 4. ''Cf.'' Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 542, n.</ref><br><br>The modes of catching fish are little known, for the only evidence available are the explanations of the various names  mentioned in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]]. Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx18_ve2_640> On [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 12, 1. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 18, 281.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 243245.</ref> says that '''[[धैवर|Dhaivara]]''' is one who takes fish by netting a tank on either side; [[दाश|Dāśa]] and '''[[शौष्कल|Śauṣkala]]''' do so by means of a fish-hook (''baḍiśa''); [[बैन्द|Bainda]], [[कैवर्त|Kaivarta]], and [[मैनाल|Maināla]] by means of a net (''[[जाल|jāla]]''); [[मार्गार|Mārgāra]] catches fish in the water with his hands; Ānda by putting in pegs at a ford (apparently by building a sort of dam); '''[[पर्णक|Parṇaka]]''' by putting a poisoned leaf on the water. But none of these explanations can claim much authority.

मृग-व्याध
<u>'''Mṛga-vyādha,'''</u> ‘the hunter,’ is the name of Sirius in the legned of Prajāpati's daughter in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_641> iii. 33, 5. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 205, n. 1, 208, n. 3;<br> Tilak, ''Orion,'' 98 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[सूर्य|Sūrya]] Siddhānta, viii. 10;<br> ix. 12, preserves the name.</ref> Prajāpati (Orion) pursues his daughter ([[रोहिणी|Rohiṇī]]), and is shot by the archer Sirius. The transference of the legend of Prajāpati to the sky is no doubt secondary, caused by the obvious similarity of the constellation in question to the idea of an archer.

मृग-शिरस्
<u>'''Mṛga-śiras, [[मृग|Mṛga]]-śīrṣa.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]],''' 1. and 2. '''[[मृग|Mṛga]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

मृगाखर
<u>'''Mṛgākhara'''</u> in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (vii. 5, 21, 1) and [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 9, 17, 3) denotes the ‘lair of wild beasts.’<br>==Foot Notes==

मृड
<u>'''Mṛḍa'''</u> is found only in compounds in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve2_644> ''Upacāya-mṛḍaṃ hiraṇyam,'' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 1;<br> ''aṣṭā-mṛḍaṃ hiraṇyam, ibid.,'' xiii. 10;<br> ''aṣṭā-pruḍ-ḍhiraṇyam,'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 1, 4, etc.</ref> where it seems to denote a small weight of gold. It is uncertain whether the reading should not be Pṛda, as in the grammatical tradition.<ref name=fx2_ve2_644> See Pāṇini, iii. 1, 123, with the Vārttika;<br> von Schroeder, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 49, 164.</ref>

मृत्तिका
<u>'''Mṛttikā,'''</u> ‘clay,’ is mentioned in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_645> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 13;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 34, 2;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, x. 1, 8. 9.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[मृद्|Mṛd]].''' 

मृत्यु
<u>'''Mṛtyu,'''</u> ‘death,’ is repeatedly mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_646> vii. 59, 12;<br> x. 13, 4;<br> 18, 1, 2;<br> x. 48, 5;<br> 60, 5. So ''[[मृत्यु|mṛtyu]]-[[बन्धु|bandhu]],'' ‘akin to death,’ Rv. viii. 18, 22;<br> x. 95, 18.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_646> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 5, 9, 4, where the world is said to be ‘yoked with death’ (''[[मृत्यु|mṛtyu]]-saṃyuta'');<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 9, 6;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 2;<br> 14, 1. 2. 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 6, 5, 1, etc. So often the ‘bonds of death’ (''[[मृत्यु|mṛtyu]]-[[पाश|pāśa]]''), Av. viii. 2, 2;<br> 8, 10. 16;<br> xvii. 1, 30;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 10, 8, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 18, etc.</ref> as a thing of terror. There are a hundred and one forms of death, the natural one by old age<ref name=fx3_ve2_646> Av. ii. 13, 2;<br> 28, 2.</ref> (''jarā''), and a hundred others, all to be avoided.<ref name=fx4_ve2_646> Av. i. 30, 3;<br> ii. 28, 1;<br> iii. 11, 5;<br> viii. 2, 27;<br> xi. 6, 16, etc.</ref> To die before old age (''purā jarasaḥ'')<ref name=fx5_ve2_646> Rv. viii. 67, 20;<br> Av. v. 30, 17;<br> x. 2, 30;<br> xiii. 3, 56.</ref> is to die before the allotted span (''purā āyuṣaḥ''),<ref name=fx6_ve2_646> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 4, 1.</ref> the normal length of life being throughout Vedic literature spoken of as a hundred years.<ref name=fx7_ve2_646> Rv. i. 64, 14;<br> 89, 9;<br> ii. 33, 2, etc. ''Cf.'' Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 384;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 193;<br> ''Festgruss an Reth,'' 137.</ref> On the other hand, the evils of old age in the loss of physical strength were clearly realized.<ref name=fx8_ve2_646> Rv. i. 71, 10;<br> 179, 1.</ref> one of the feats of the Aśvins was to restore old '''Cyavāna''' to his former youth and powers, and another was the rejuventation of '''Kali.'''<ref name=fx9_ve2_646> x. 39, 8. ''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 243.</ref> The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx10_ve2_646> See Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 62 ''et seq.''</ref> is full of charms of all sorts to avert death and secure length of years (''āyuṣya'').<br><br>The modes of disposing of the dead were burial and cremation (see '''[[अग्निदग्ध|Agnidagdha]]'''). Both existed in the early Vedic period,<ref name=fx11_ve2_646> See Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, clii;<br> Winternitz, ''Geschichte der indischen Literatur,'' 1, 84, 85.</ref> as in Greece;<ref name=fx12_ve2_646> See Lang, ''Homer and his Age,'' 82 ''et seq.;<br> cf.'' Burrows, ''Discoveries in Crete,'' 209-213.</ref> but the former method was on the whole less favoured, and tended to be regarded with disapproval. The bones of the dead, whether burned or not, were marked by the erection of a tumulus ('''[[श्मशान|Śmaśāna]]'''): the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx13_ve2_646> xiii. 8, 2, 1.</ref> preserves traces of strong differences of opinion as to the mode in which these tumuli should be constructed. There is little or no trace<ref name=fx14_ve2_646> ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 410;<br> Weinhold, ''Altnordisches Leben,'' 483 ''et seq.''</ref> of the custom common in northern lands of sending the dead man to sea in a burning ship: the reference  to a ship<ref name=fx15_ve2_646> Rv. x. 63, 10;<br> 135, 4;<br> Av. vii. 6, 3, and ''cf.'' Weber, Proceedings of the Berlin Academy, 1895, 856.</ref> seems to point to mythical perils after death, not to the mode of burial.<br><br>The life after death was to the Vedic Indian a repetition of the life in this world. He passed into the next world ''sarvatanuḥ sāṅgaḥ,'' ‘with whole body and all his members,’<ref name=fx16_ve2_646> Av. v. 6, 11;<br> xviii. 4, 64;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 6, 1, 1;<br> xi. 1, 8, 6;<br> xii. 8, 3, 31, and ''cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 3, 5, 2;<br> 6, 3;<br> 6, 6, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 20, 5;<br> 10, 11, 1.</ref> enjoying there the same pleasures as he had enjoyed on earth. Even in the Rigveda<ref name=fx17_ve2_646> Rv. ii. 29, 6;<br> iii. 26, 8;<br> iv. 5, 5;<br> 25, 6;<br> vii. 104, 3. 11. 17;<br> x. 152, 4.</ref> there are hints of evil awaiting evil-doers, but it is not until the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx18_ve2_646> ii. 14, 3;<br> v. 19, 3;<br> 30, 11;<br> viii. 2, 24;<br> xii. 4, 36;<br> xviii. 3, 3. ''Cf.'' also v. 19;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 5.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx19_ve2_646> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 6, 1, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 9, 240 ''et seq.;<br>'' Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 42-44 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 236 ''et seq.'').</ref> that a hell of punishment is set out, and it is in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx20_ve2_646> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 2, 2, 27;<br> x. 6, 3, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 3, etc.</ref> that good and evil deeds are said to produce happiness or hell hereafter. But there is no hint of extinction<ref name=fx21_ve2_646> ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 169.</ref> in the Rigveda as the fate of the wicked, as Roth<ref name=fx22_ve2_646> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 3, 329-347;<br> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 238 ''et seq.''</ref> inclined to think. The Vedic poet not being deeply moral, his verses do not convey, as would those of a man convinced of sin, warnings of future judgment.

मृद्
<u>'''Mṛd'''</u> denotes ‘clay’ in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_647> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 7, 9, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xi. 55.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_647> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 1, 1, 13;<br> 2, 34;<br> 3, 3;<br> 3, 1, 22, 32;<br> 3, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] vi. 27, etc.</ref> (''cf.'' '''[[मृत्तिका|Mṛttikā]]'''). A ‘lump of clay’ also occurs in the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx3_ve2_647> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 4, 2, 1;<br> 5, 2, 1;<br> xiv. 2, 1, 8;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 4.</ref> and a Mṛt-paca, ‘potter,’ in the Maitrāyaṇī [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_647> ii. 6;<br> iii. 3.</ref> A ‘clay vessel,’ Mṛtpātra,<ref name=fx5_ve2_647> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxi. 2.</ref> and vessels (''[[पात्र|pātra]]'') made of clay (''mṛn-maya''),<ref name=fx6_ve2_647> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 1, 3, 4, etc.</ref> are mentioned, and the grave is called the ‘house of clay.’<ref name=fx7_ve2_647> Rv. vii. 89, 1 (''mṛnmaya [[गृह|gṛha]]'').</ref> 

मृध्
<u>'''Mṛdh'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_648> i. 131, 6;<br> 138, 2;<br> 182, 4;<br> ii. 22, 3;<br> 23, 13;<br> 28, 7;<br> iii. 47, 2;<br> v. 30, 7, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_648> Av. v. 20, 12;<br> vi. 2, 2;<br> viii. 5, 8;<br> xiii. 1, 5, 27;<br> xviii. 2, 59;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 7, 4;<br> 5, 3, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, v. 37;<br> xi. 10 72, etc.</ref> denotes ‘enemy.’

मृध्र-वाच्
<u>'''Mṛdhra-vāc.'''</u> See '''[[दस्यु|Dasyu]]''' and '''[[दास|Dāsa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

मेक्षण
<u>'''Mekṣaṇa'''</u> is the name in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_650> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 10, 4;<br> iii. 7, 4, 9;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 2, 13, etc.</ref> of a wooden ladle used for stirring up the oblation ('''Caru''').

मेखला
<u>'''Mekhalā'''</u> denotes ‘girdle’ in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_651> Av. vi. 133, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 3, 3, 5;<br> vi. 2, 2, 7;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiii. 4;<br> xxiv. 9;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 6, 7, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_651> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 1, 10;<br> iv. 4, 5, 2;<br> vi. 2, 2, 39, etc.</ref> The '''Brahmacārin''' wore a girdle.<ref name=fx3_ve2_651> In the [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] Sūtras the girdle of the Brahmin is of [[मुञ्ज|Muñja]], that of the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] of a bowstring, and that of the [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] of wool or hemp. See Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 19, 12, etc.</ref>

मेघ
<u>'''Megha'''</u> denotes ‘cloud’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_652> i. 181, 8.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_652> Av. iv. 15, 7;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 2, 5;<br> xii. 3, 2, 6;<br> ''mahā-[[मेघ|megha]],'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, vii. 3;<br> viii. 7. The verb ''meghay,'' ‘to make cloudy weather,’ is found in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 4, 5, 1, and ''meghayantī'' is the name of one of the seven '''[[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]],''' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 4, 1;<br> Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 301, 368.</ref>

मेथि
<u>'''Methi'''</u> is found in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_653> viii. 5, 20.</ref> denoting ‘post.’ The word is also found in the marriage ritual,<ref name=fx2_ve2_653> Av. xiv. 1, 40. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 9, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxv. 8;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 29, 22;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 3, 21.</ref> when the sense is, according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, a post to support the pole of a chariot. In one passage of the Rigveda it is perhaps used of posts forming a palisade.<ref name=fx3_ve2_653> viii. 53, 5 (''mita-methībhiḥ'' for ''medhābhiḥ,'' conjectured by Roth, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesell schaft,'' 48, 109).</ref> In the Pañcaviṃśa  [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_653> xiii. 9, 17. ''Cf.'' Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 19, 1 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 23, 329).</ref> it appears in the form of Methī to denote the post to which the sacrificial cow is tied. The word is very variously spelt, Medhi and Meṭhī also being found.

मेध
<u>'''Medha'''</u> is a word of uncertain sense occurring in a [[वालखिल्य|Vālakhilya]] hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_654> viii. 50, 10 (''cf.'' viii. 49, 10), where, as a rule, the sense of ‘sacrifice’ is accepted as adequate.</ref> According to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, the proper name of a sacrificer may be meant.

मेधातिथि
<u>'''Medhātithi,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_655> This is the form of the later texts and of Rv. viii. 8, 20, where he occurs with '''[[कण्व|Kaṇva]].'''</ref> '''[[मेध्यातिथि|Medhyātithi]]'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_655> This is the usual form in the Rv.: i. 36, 10. 11. 17;<br> viii. 1, 30;<br> 2, 40;<br> 33, 4;<br> 49, 9;<br> 51, 1;<br> ix. 43, 3.</ref> (‘having a guest at the sacrifice’) appear to be the names of one and the same man, a descendant of '''[[कण्व|Kaṇva]]''' and a famous Vedic '''[[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]],''' to whom the authorship of various hymns<ref name=fx3_ve2_655> i. 12-23;<br> viii. 1-3;<br> 22. 23;<br> ix. 4143. In the ascriptions [[मेधातिथि|Medhātithi]] and [[मेध्यातिथि|Medhyātithi]] are confused.</ref> is attributed in the Anukramaṇī (Index). To him Indra is said in the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve2_655> viii. 2, 40. ''Cf.'' i. 51, 1, where, however, there is no mention of Medhāithi.</ref> to have come in the form of a ram: this myth is perpetuated in the Subrahmaṇyā formula<ref name=fx5_ve2_655> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 79;<br> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 4, 18;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 12, 3. Moreover, the legend is alluded to in the Śāṭyāyanaka. See Sāyaṇa on Rv. i. 51, 1;<br> viii. 2, 40, and Oertel, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, ccxl. On the explanation of the legend, ''cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 38 ''et seq.''</ref> recited by the priest while the Soma is being carried within the sacrificial enclosure, when Indra is hailed as ‘ram of [[मेधातिथि|Medhātithi]].’ He appears also as a rival of '''[[वत्स|Vatsa]],''' whom he accused of low birth, but who convinced him of his error by undergoing a fire ordeal (''cf.'' '''[[दिव्य|Divya]]''').<ref name=fx6_ve2_655> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 6, 6.</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx7_ve2_655> iv. 29, 6.</ref> he is mentioned with many other sages, and occurs elsewhere<ref name=fx8_ve2_655> As a Gṛhapati at the sacrifice of the '''Vibhindukīyas,''' Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 233 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 38);<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xv. 10, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxviii. 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 102, 105;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 146.</ref> also as a sage. 

मेध्य
<u>'''Medhya'''</u> is the name of a man, an ancient sacrificer, in a hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_656> viii. 52, 2.</ref> In the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_656> xvi. 11, 26. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 39;<br> Ludwig. Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 163.</ref> he is erroneously transmuted into '''[[पृषध्र|Pṛṣadhra]] [[मेध्य|Medhya]] [[मातरिश्वन्|Mātariśvan]],''' the patron of '''[[प्रस्कण्व|Praskaṇva]] [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].'''

मेध्यातिथि
<u>'''Medhyātithi.'''</u> See '''[[मेधातिथि|Medhātithi]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

मेनका
<u>'''Menakā.'''</u> See 2. '''[[मेना|Menā]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

मेना
<u>'''1. Menā'''</u> in a few passages of the Rigveda denotes ‘woman.’<ref name=fx1_ve2_659> Rv. i. 62, 7;<br> 95, 6;<br> ii. 39, 2.</ref> The word is also used in the sense of the ‘female’ of an animal, either mare<ref name=fx2_ve2_659> Rv. i. 121, 2.</ref> or cow.<ref name=fx3_ve2_659> x. 111, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Indische Studien,'' 2, 316, 317.</ref>

मेना
<u>'''2. Menā'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_660> This is the ordinary form of the name.</ref> or '''[[मेनका|Menakā]]'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_660> So Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, where the masculine form Mena is the epithet of [[वृषण्अश्व|Vṛṣaṇaśva]].</ref> is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_660> Rv. i. 51, 13, where Sāyaṇa tells the legend from the Śāṭyāyanaka. ''Cf.'' Oertel, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, ccxl.</ref> and in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx4_ve2_660> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 4, 18;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 12, 3;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]. i. 3, 17.<br><br>''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 16, 81, n.</ref> as the daughter, or perhaps wife, of '''[[वृषण्अश्व|Vṛṣaṇaśva]].''' The meaning of the legend connected with her is quite unknown. ''Cf.'' '''[[मैनाक|Maināka]]''' or '''Mainaga.'''

मेष
<u>'''Meṣa'''</u> denotes ‘ram’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_661> i. 43, 6;<br> 116, 16;<br> viii. 2, 40;<br> x. 27, 17, etc.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_661> Av. vi. 49, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 59;<br> xix. 90;<br> xxiv. 30;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 12, 1;<br> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 4, 18, etc.</ref> while Meṣī means ‘sheep.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_661> Rv. i. 43, 6;<br> Vājasaneyī Saṃhitā, iii. 59;<br> xxiv. 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 4, 4. etc.</ref> Both words are also used to denote the  ‘wool’<ref name=fx4_ve2_661> ''[[मेष|Meṣa]],'' Rv. viii. 86, 11;<br> ''Meṣī.'' ix. 8, 5;<br> 86, 47;<br> 107, 11.</ref> of the sheep, '''especially''' as employed for the Soma filter. A wild (''āraṇya'') '''ram is''' mentioned in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx5_ve2_661> xxiv. 30.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 66, 67.</ref>

मेहत्नू
<u>'''Mehatnū'''</u> is the name of a stream in the Nadīstuti (‘Praise of Rivers’) in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_662> x. 75, 6. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 14;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 344.</ref> It must apparently have been a tributary of the '''[[सिन्धु|Sindhu]]''' (Indus), entering that river before the '''[[क्रुमु|Krumu]]''' (Kurum) and '''[[गोमती|Gomatī]]''' (Gomal). It may conceivably have been a tributary of the '''[[क्रुमु|Krumu]].'''

मैत्रायणीय ब्राह्मण
<u>'''Maitrāyaṇīya Brāhmaṇa'''</u> is the name of a text mentioned in the Śulba [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] of [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_663> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxxii. 8. ''Cf.'' Caland, ''Über das rituclle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 41, who cannot trace the citation in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā.</ref>

मैत्रेय
<u>'''Maitreya'''</u> is the patronymic or metronymic<ref name=fx1_ve2_664> Patronymic from Mitrayu, according to Pāṇini, vi. 4, 174;<br> vii. 3, 2;<br> metronymic from Mitrā, according to the commentator on Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 12, 1.</ref> of '''[[कौषारव|Kauṣārava]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_664> viii. 28, 18.</ref> It is also applied to '''Glāva''' in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_664> i. 12, 1;<br> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 31 ''et seq.;<br>'' Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 110.</ref>

मैत्रेयी
<u>'''Maitreyī'''</u> is the name of one of the wives of '''Yājṅavalkya''' according to the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (ii. 4, 1 ''et seq.;'' iv. 5, 2 ''et seq.'').<br>==Foot Notes==

मैनाक
<u>'''Maināka,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[मेनका|Menakā]],'''’ is the name of a mountain among the Himālayas in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx1_ve2_666> i. 31, 2. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 78;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 93.</ref> There is a various reading Maināga. 

मैनाल
<u>'''Maināla'''</u> occurs in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_667> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 16;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 12, 1.</ref> It seems clearly to mean ‘fisherman’ from Mīna, ‘fish,’ as Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx2_ve2_667> On [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> and Mahīdhara<ref name=fx3_ve2_667> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> explain it.

मौजवत
<u>'''Maujavata.'''</u> See '''[[मूजवन्त्|Mūjavant]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

मौद्गल्य
<u>'''Maudgalya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[मुद्गल|Mudgala]],'''’ is the patronymic of several persons, '''[[नाक|Nāka]],'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_669> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 5, 2, 1;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 9, 1.</ref> '''Śatabalākṣa,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_669> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], xi. 6.</ref> and '''[[लाङ्गलायन|Lāṅgalāyana]].'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_669> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 8.</ref> '''A Brahmacārin''' of the name is mentioned in the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_669> i. 1, 31;<br> Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 110. ''Cf.'' also Caland, ''Über das rituelle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 35.</ref> as disputing with '''[[ग्लाव मैत्रेय|Glāva Maitreya]].'''

मौन
<u>'''Mauna,'''</u> ‘descendant of Muni,’ is the patronymic of '''Aṇīcin''' in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xxiii. 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

मौषिकी-पुत्र
<u>'''Mauṣikī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of Mūṣikā,’ is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[हारिकर्णीपुत्र|Hārikarṇīputra]]''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 4, 30).<br>==Foot Notes==

म्लेच्छ
<u>'''Mleccha'''</u> occurs in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_672> iii. 2, 1, 24.</ref> in the sense of a barbarian in speech. The Brahmin is there forbidden to use barbarian speech. The example<ref name=fx2_ve2_672> iii. 2, 1, 23.</ref> given of such speech is ''lie 'lavo,'' explained by Sāyaṇa as ''he 'rayaḥ,'' ‘ho, foes.’ If this is correct--the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension has a different reading<ref name=fx3_ve2_672> See Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 31, n. 3.</ref> --the barbarians referred to were Āryan speakers, though not speakers of Sanskrit, but of a Prākṛta form of speech.<ref name=fx4_ve2_672> Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 180;<br> ''cf.'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āranyaka,'' 179, 180, 196.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[वाच्|Vāc]].''' 

यक्ष
<u>'''Yakṣa'''</u> is found several times in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_673> i. 190, 4;<br> iv. 3, 13, v. 70, 4;<br> vii. 56, 16;<br> 61, 5;<br> x. 88, 13.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_673> viii. 9, 25;<br> x. 2, 32;<br> 7, 38;<br> 8, 43;<br> xi. 2, 24, etc.</ref> in passages in which Ludwig<ref name=fx3_ve2_673> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 262.</ref> sees the meaning of a feast or holy practice in accordance with the native commentators. It is, however, very doubtful whether this sense ever occurs.<ref name=fx4_ve2_673> ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' and Geldner's full discussion, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 126-143.</ref>

यक्षु
<u>'''Yakṣu'''</u> is mentioned, once in the singular and once in the plural, in the hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_674> vii. 18, 6. 19.</ref> which celebrates '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]]''' battle with the ten kings. Who they were and what part they played in that conflict is quite uncertain. They seem, from the wording of the text, to have taken part in two conflicts, as Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve2_674> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 126, 127.</ref> says--one on the '''[[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]]''' (Ravi), and one on the '''[[यमुना|Yamunā]]''' (Jumna)--with the aid of the '''Ajas''' and '''Śigrus,''' under the leadership of '''Bḥeda.''' It is, however, at least possible that in the former passage '''Yadu''' should be read for [[यक्षु|Yakṣu]], or, at any rate, [[यक्षु|Yakṣu]] be deemed a contemptuous substitute of the name of a possibly un-Āryan or unimportant tribe (as their allies, the Ajas and Śigrus, clearly were) for the name of the certainly famous Yadus, as is suggested by Hopkins.<ref name=fx3_ve2_674> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 259 ''et seq.'' It is not clear however, whether Hopkins thinks that the Yadus are alluded to, but it seems probable.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]].'''

यक्ष्म
<u>'''Yakṣma'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_675> i. 122, 9;<br> x. 85, 31;<br> 97, 11. 12;<br> 137, 4;<br> 163, 1-6.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_675> ii. 10, 5. 6;<br> iii. 31, 1;<br> v. 4, 9;<br> 30, 6;<br> viii. 7, 2;<br> ix. 8, 3. 7. 10;<br> xii. 2, 1. 2;<br> 4, 8;<br> xix. 36, 1;<br> 38, 1.</ref> frequently denotes ‘illness,’ in general, perhaps as rendering the body emaciated. A hundred kinds of [[यक्ष्म|Yakṣma]] are referred to in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx3_ve2_675> xii. 97.</ref> and ''a-[[यक्ष्म|yakṣma]]'' in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx4_ve2_675> xvii. 11.</ref>  denotes ‘free from disease.’ In the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx5_ve2_675> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 5, 2;<br> 5, 6, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 7;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 3, 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 375 ''et seq.;<br>'' Grohmann, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 400;<br> Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 60;<br> Jolly, ''Medicin,'' 89.</ref> an account is given of the origin of [[यक्ष्म|Yakṣma]], which is distinguished as of three kinds--'''[[राज-यक्ष्म|Rāja-yakṣma]],''' ‘royal [[यक्ष्म|Yakṣma]],’ [[पाप-यक्ष्म|Pāpa-yakṣma]], ‘evil [[यक्ष्म|Yakṣma]],’ and '''Jāyenya,''' most probably ‘syphilis.’ The second of the series is elsewhere unknown, and can hardly be defined, for it merely means ‘serious or deadly disease.’ ''Cf.'' also '''[[अज्ञातयक्ष्म|Ajñātayakṣma]].'''

यजत
<u>'''Yajata'''</u> occurs in a hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_676> v. 44, 10, 11. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 138.</ref> where he is apparently a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] or a sacrificer.

यजुर्-वेद
<u>'''Yajur-veda,'''</u> the ‘Veda of the sacrificial utterance’ ('''[[यजुस्|Yajus]]'''), is mentioned frequently in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_677> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 12, 9, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 32, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 8, 3;<br> xii. 3, 4, 9.</ref> and Upaniṣads.<ref name=fx2_ve2_677> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 3, 5;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, viii. 3, 8;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 5, 5;<br> ii. 4. 10;<br> iv. 1, 2;<br> 5, 11;<br> Chāndogya Upar ṣad, i. 3, 7;<br> iii. 2, 1. 2;<br> 15, 7;<br> vii. 2, 4;<br> 2, 1;<br> 7, 1;<br> Āśvalāyana Sra [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 7, 2;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Sra [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 2, 6, etc.</ref>

यजुस्
<u>'''Yajus'''</u> is repeatedly distinguished from the Ṛc and the '''Sāman''' in Vedic literature.<ref name=fx1_ve2_678> Rv. x. 90, 9;<br> Av. v. 26, 1;<br> ix. 6, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 3, 1;<br> 9, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, i. 30;<br> iv. 1;<br> xix. 28;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 29, 21;<br> viii. 13, 2;<br> Śatapatha Brahmaṇa, i. 2, 1, 7;<br> vi. 5, 1, 2;<br> 3, 4, etc. In the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 33, there is a reference to the ''śuklāni Yajūṃṣi,'' ‘white or pure [[यजुस्|Yajus]],’ as promulgated by '''[[वाजसनेय|Vājasaneya]] [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]],''' whence the Vājasaneyi Saṃhītā is popularly known as the ‘White [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].’ The theory that this is due to the fact that in the Vājasaneyi the [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] parts of the text are not accompanied by [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] passages is, though accepted by Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 103, 104;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xxvii, and others, now to be abandoned. In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 10, the expression ''śukrayajāṃṣi'' seems to refer to books iv. and v. of that text. ''Cf.'' also Winternitz. ''Geschichte der indischen Literatur,'' 1, 149, n.</ref> The [[यजुस्|Yajus]] is the utterance accompanying the sacrifice, and may have the form of verse or prose, the tern covering both. 

यज्ञ-गाथा
<u>'''Yajña-gāthā'''</u> denotes a verse ('''[[गाथा|Gāthā]]''') containing a maxim as to the sacrifice of any kind or sort,<ref name=fx1_ve2_679> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 43, 5;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 12, 6;<br> Śānkhāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 8, 26;<br> 9, 6, etc.</ref> or, as it is expressed in the Mahābhārata,<ref name=fx2_ve2_679> xii. 791. 2316.</ref> a ‘verse sung regarding the sacrifice’ (''[[गाथा|gāthā]] yajña-gītā'').

यज्ञ-वचस् राजस्तम्बायन
<u>'''Yajña-vacas Rājastambāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Rājastamba,’ is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[तुर कावषेय|Tura Kāvaṣeya]],''' according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_680> x. 4, 2, 1;<br> 6, 5, 9;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 5, 4 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref> He is also mentioned in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve2_680> iii. 10, 3;<br> iv. 8, 2.</ref>

यज्ञ-सेन
<u>'''Yajña-sena'''</u> is the name of a teacher with the patronymic '''[[चैत्र|Caitra]]''' or '''[[चैत्रियायण|Caitriyāyaṇa]]''' mentioned in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_681> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 3, 8, 1 ([[चैत्रियायण|Caitriyāyaṇa]]);<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxi. 4 ([[चैत्र|Caitra]]).</ref>

यज्ञेषु
<u>'''Yajñeṣu'''</u> is the name of a man in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_682> i. 5, 2, 1. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 306.</ref> He was made to prosper by his priest '''[[मात्स्य|Mātsya]],''' who knew the exact moment of sacrificing.

यज्ञोपवीत
<u>'''Yajñopavīta'''</u> denotes the ‘wearing of the Brahminical thread over the left shoulder at the sacrifice,’ and is mentioned as early as the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_683> iii. 10, 9, 12. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 11, 1;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 2, 1;<br> 6, 1, 12;<br> and '''[[प्राचीनावीत|Prācīnāvīta]].'''</ref> Tilak,<ref name=fx2_ve2_683> ''Orion,'' 145 ''et seq.,'' quoting [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 1, and, the view of the Mīmāmsists, Jaiminīyanyāyamālāvistara, iii. 4, 1. This view is not prejudiced by the quite implausible conjectures as to Orion's belt with which it is combined. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books o the East,'' 12, 361, 424.</ref> however, urges that it was not originally a thread that was worn, but a garment of cloth ('''[[वासस्|Vāsas]]''') or of deerskin ('''[[अजिन|Ajina]]'''). This seems quite probable. 

यति
<u>'''Yati'''</u> is the name of an ancient clan which is connected with the '''Bhṛgus''' in two passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_684> viii. 3, 9;<br> 6, 18;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 465, n.</ref> where the Yatis certainly seem to be real persons. In another hymn,<ref name=fx2_ve2_684> x. 72, 7.</ref> however, they already appear as almost mythical. In the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx3_ve2_684> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 9, 2;<br> vi. 2, 7, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, viii. 5;<br> xi. 10;<br> xxv. 6;<br> xxxvi. 7;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 1, 4;<br> xiii. 4, 16;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 28, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 3, etc.;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 437 ''et seq.''</ref> and elsewhere,<ref name=fx4_ve2_684> ii. 304. In the parallel passage, Av. ii. 5, 3, the reading ''Yatīr'' is found, possibly an error for ''Yatīn,'' or merely a blunder. ''Cf.'' Muir, ''op. cit.,'' 5, 49, n. 92;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 44;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vi. 3, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 146.</ref> the Yatis are a race whom Indra, in an evil moment, gave over to the hyænas ('''[[सालावृक|Sālāvṛka]]'''): exactly what is referred to is uncertain. Yati is mentioned with [[भृगु|Bhṛgu]] in a verse of the [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_684/>

यदु
<u>'''Yadu'''</u> is the name of a tribe and of the king of the tribe. They are mentioned repeatedly in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_685> i. 36, 18;<br> 54, 6;<br> 174, 9;<br> iv. 30, 17;<br> v. 31, 8;<br> vi. 45, 1;<br> viii. 4, 7;<br> 7, 18;<br> 9, 14;<br> 10, 5;<br> 45, 27;<br> ix. 61, 2;<br> x. 49, 8;<br> plural, i. 108, 8. See '''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]],''' and Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 258 ''et seq.''</ref> normally in conjunction with '''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]].''' They seem to have taken part in the great battle against '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]]:'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_685> Whether Yadu should be read in Rv. vii. 18, 6, or not, the Yadus seem to be meant. ''Cf.'' '''[[यक्षु|Yakṣu]].'''</ref> the Yadu and the [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] kings seem to have escaped with their lives, while the '''Anu''' and the '''[[द्रुह्यु|Druhyu]]''' kings perished. This is at least the most natural explanation of several passages,<ref name=fx3_ve2_685> Rv. i. 174, 9;<br> iv. 30, 17;<br> v. 31, 3;<br> vi. 20, 12.</ref> though these passages possibly refer to a successful raid across the '''[[सरयु|Sarayu]],''' and a defeat of two princes, Arṇa and [[चित्ररथ|Citraratha]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_685> Rv. iv. 30, 18.</ref> That [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] was the Yadu king, as Hopkins<ref name=fx5_ve2_685> ''Loc. cit.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 122, 124;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 205;<br> 5, 142;<br> Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 37.</ref> holds, is most improbable.

यन्तृ
<u>'''Yantṛ'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_686> i. 162, 19;<br> x. 22, 5.</ref> and in the Sūtras<ref name=fx2_ve2_686> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 6, 29, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘driver’ of horses or ‘charioteer.’ 

यम
<u>'''Yama'''</u> denotes ‘twins,’ the birth of which is frequently alluded to in Vedic literature.<ref name=fx1_ve2_687> Rv. i. 66, 4;<br> 164, 15;<br> ii. 39, 2;<br> iii. 39, 3;<br> v. 57, 4;<br> vi. 59, 2;<br> x. 13, 2;<br> 117, 9;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 4, 10, etc.</ref> Twins of different sex seem to be indicated by the expression ''yamau mithunau.''<ref name=fx2_ve2_687> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiii. 4;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], xii. 10.</ref> There are traces of the belief--widely spread among negro and other races--that twins are uncanny and of evil omen,<ref name=fx3_ve2_687> Av. iii. 28;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 9, 8;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxv. 4, 35;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 14, etc. ''Cf.'' '''[[यमसू|Yamasū]];<br> [[युक्ताश्व|Yuktāśva]].'''</ref> but there are also vestiges of the opposite opinion, that twins are lucky.<ref name=fx4_ve2_687> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 1, 3;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxiv. 12, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 1, 8, and ''cf.'' Rv. iii. 39, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 298300;<br> ''Naxatra,'' 2, 314, n.</ref>

यम-नक्षत्र
<u>'''Yama-nakṣatra.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

यम-सू
<u>'''Yama-sū,'''</u> a ‘bearer of twins,’ is one of the victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_689> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 15;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 11, 1.</ref>

यमुना
<u>'''Yamunā,'''</u> ‘twin,’ the name of a river, so called as running parallel with the Ganges, is mentioned thrice in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_690> v. 52, 17;<br> vii. 18, 19;<br> x. 75, 5.</ref> and not rarely later. According to the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_690> vii. 18, 19. See '''[[भरत|Bharata]]''' and '''Kuru.'''</ref> the '''Tṛtsus''' and '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]]''' won a great victory against their foes on the [[यमुना|Yamunā]]; there is no reason<ref name=fx3_ve2_690> The Tṛtsus’ territory lay between the [[यमुना|Yamunā]] and the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]''' on the east and the west respectively.</ref> whatever to accept Hopkins'<ref name=fx4_ve2_690> ''India, Old and New,'' 52.</ref> view that the [[यमुना|Yamunā]] here was another name of the '''[[परुष्णी|Paruṣṇī]]''' (Ravi). In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx5_ve2_690> iv. 9, 10.</ref> the salve ('''[[आञ्जन|Āñjana]]''') of the [[यमुना|Yamunā]] (''Yāmuna'') is mentioned along with that of '''[[त्रिककुद्|Trikakud]]''' (''[[त्रैककुद|Traikakuda]]'') as of value. In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]]<ref name=fx6_ve2_690> viii. 23.</ref> and the Śatapatha<ref name=fx7_ve2_690> xiii. 5, 4, 11.</ref> Brāhmaṇas the '''Bharatas''' are famed as victorious on the [[यमुना|Yamunā]]. Other Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx8_ve2_690> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 4, 11 (''cf.'' '''[[पारावत|Pārāvata]]''');<br> xxv. 10, 24;<br> 13, 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 29, 25. 33;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxiv. 6, 10. 39;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 19, 9, 10;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 6, 28, etc.</ref>  also mention this river. In the Mantrapāṭha<ref name=fx9_ve2_690> ii. 11, 12.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 5;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 323.</ref> the '''Sālvas''' are spoken of as dwelling on its banks.

ययाति
<u>'''Yayāti'''</u> is mentioned twice in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_691> i. 31, 17;<br> x. 63, 1.</ref> once as an ancient sacrificer, and once as Nahuṣya, ‘descendant of '''Nahuṣa,'''’ apparently a king. There is no trace whatever of his connexion with '''[[पूरु|Pūru]],''' as in the Epic,<ref name=fx2_ve2_691> ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 147;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts'' 12, 232.</ref> the tradition of which must be deemed to be inaccurate.

यव
<u>'''1. Yava'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_692> i. 23, 15;<br> 66, 3;<br> 117, 21;<br> 135, 8;<br> 176, 2;<br> ii. 5, 6;<br> 14, 11;<br> v. 85, 3;<br> vii. 3, 4;<br> viii. 2, 3;<br> 22, 6;<br> 63. 9;<br> 78, 10, etc.</ref> appears to be a generic term for any sort of ‘grain,’ and not merely ‘barley.’ The latter sense is probably found in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_692> ii. 8, 3;<br> vi. 30, 1;<br> 50. 1. 2;<br> 91, 1;<br> 141, 2;<br> 142, 1. 2;<br> viii. 7, 20;<br> ix. 1, 22;<br> 6, 14;<br> xii. 1, 42;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 10, 3;<br> 4, 10, 5;<br> vii. 2, 10, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxv. 10;<br> xxvi. 5;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, v. 26;<br> xviii. 12;<br> xxiii. 30;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 4, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 4, 20: ii. 5, 2, 1;<br> iii. 6, 1, 9. 10;<br> iv. 2, 1, 11;<br> xii. 7, 2, 9;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 14, 3, etc.;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 12.</ref> and is regular later. The barley harvest came after spring,<ref name=fx3_ve2_692> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 13.</ref> in the summer.<ref name=fx4_ve2_692> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 2, 10, 2.</ref> That barley was cultivated in the period of the Rigveda<ref name=fx5_ve2_692> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 86, n.</ref> is not certain, but on the whole very probable.<ref name=fx6_ve2_692> Sowing (''vap'') grain is referred to in Rv. i. 117, 21;<br> ripening of grain in 135, 8;<br> ploughing (''kṛṣ'') in i. 176, 2. Grain rejoicing in rain is alluded to in ii. 5, 6. See '''[[कृषि|Kṛṣi]].'''<br><br>''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 282;<br> Kuhn, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 355, 356;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 238, 239.</ref>

यव
<u>'''2. Yava.'''</u> See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

यवस
<u>'''Yavasa'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_694> i. 38, 5;<br> 91, 13;<br> iii. 45, 3;<br> iv. 41, 10;<br> 42, 5;<br> vii. 18, 10;<br> 87, 2;<br> 93, 2;<br> 102, 1, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_694> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxi. 43, etc.</ref> denotes the ‘grass’ on which animals feed, and which is burned by the forest fire.<ref name=fx3_ve2_694> ''Cf.'' Agni, ''yavasād,'' in Rv. i. 94, 11.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 47;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 87.</ref> 

यवागू
<u>'''Yavāgū'''</u> means ‘barley-gruel,’<ref name=fx1_ve2_695> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 5, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 8, 8;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 13, etc.</ref> but is also used of weak decoctions of other kinds of grain.<ref name=fx2_ve2_695> Of '''[[जर्तिल|Jartila]]''' and '''Gvīdhuka,''' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 4, 3, 2.</ref>

यवाशिर्
<u>'''Yavāśir'''</u> is used in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_696> i. 187, 9;<br> ii. 22, 1;<br> iii. 42, 7;<br> viii. 94, 4. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 227;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 279.</ref> as an epithet of '''Soma,''' meaning ‘mixed with grain.’

यवाष
<u>'''Yavāṣa.'''</u> See '''[[येवाष|Yevāṣa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

यव्य
<u>'''Yavya'''</u> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 7, 2, 46) denotes ‘month’ (lit., ‘containing a first half,’ see 2. '''Yava''').<br>==Foot Notes==

यव्यावती
<u>'''Yavyāvatī'''</u> is the name of a river in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_699> vi. 27, 6.</ref> and in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_699> xxv. 7, 2.</ref> Hillebrandt<ref name=fx3_ve2_699> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 268, n. 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 18, 19;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 204;<br> Kaegi, ''Rigveda,'' n. 338;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 168, n. 1.</ref> thinks that the river is one in Iran, the Djob (Zhobe), near the Iryāb (Haliāb), but there is no reason to accept this identification.

यशस्विन् जयन्त लौहित्य
<u>'''Yaśasvin [[जयन्त|Jayanta]] Lauhitya'''</u> (‘descendant of Lohita’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''Kṛṣṇarāta Triveda [[लौहित्य|Lauhitya]]''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 42, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

यष्टि
<u>'''Yaṣṭi,'''</u> ‘staff,’ is mentioned in the latest parts of the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_701> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 2, 17 of ''[[वेणु|veṇu]],'' ‘bamboo’);<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 7;<br> Kauṣitāki Upaniṣap iv. 19. etc.</ref> 

यस्क
<u>'''Yaska'''</u> is the name of a man. The Yaskas, descendants of Girikṣit (''Gairikṣitāḥ'') are mentioned in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve2_702> xiii. 12. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 475 ''et seq.;<br>'' 8, 245 ''et seq.;<br> Indian Literature,'' 41, n. 30.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[यास्क|Yāska]].'''

याज्ञ-तुर
<u>'''Yājña-tura,'''</u> ‘descendant of Yajñatura,’ is the patronymic of 2. '''[[ऋषभ|Ṛṣabha]]''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_703> xii. 8, 3, 7;<br> xiii. 5, 4, 15;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 9, 8, 10.</ref>

याज्ञ-वल्क्य
<u>'''Yājña-valkya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Yajñavalkya,’ is repeatedly mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_704> i. 1, 1, 9;<br> 3, 1, 21. 26;<br> 9, 3, 16;<br> ii. 3, 1, 21;<br> 4, 3, 2;<br> 5, 1, 2 (where he is said to be in contradiction with the Rigveda);<br> iii. 1, 1, 4;<br> 2, 21;<br> 3, 10;<br> 8, 2, 24 (cursed by a '''[[चरक|Caraka]]''' teacher);<br> iv. 2, 1, 7;<br> 6, 1, 10;<br> 8, 7, etc. There are no references to [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]] in books v-ix, which, on the contrary, owe their doctrine to '''[[तुर कावषेय|Tura Kāvaṣeya]]''' and [[शाण्डिल्य|Śāṇḍilya]];<br> but the fame of [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]] revives in books x-xiv--''e.g.,'' xi. 3, 1, 2;<br> 4, 2, 17;<br> 3, 20;<br> 6, 2, 1;<br> 3, 1;<br> xii. 4, 1, 10, etc.</ref> as an authority on questions of ritual. He is, however, also given as an authority on questions of philosophy in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_704> iii. 1, 2 ''et seq.;<br>'' 2, 10 ''et seq.;<br>'' 3, 1;<br> 4, 1;<br> 5, 1;<br> 6, 1;<br> 7, 1, etc.</ref> but Oldenberg<ref name=fx3_ve2_704> ''Buddha,''^5 34, n. 1.</ref> is, no doubt, right in thinking that no possible importance can be attached to the mention of [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]] in the latter capacity. He is said to have been a pupil of '''[[उद्दालक आरुणि|Uddālaka Āruṇi]],'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_704> vi. 4, 33 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 5, 4 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> whom he opposed successfully in a dispute.<ref name=fx5_ve2_704> iii. 7, 1.</ref> His two wives, '''[[मैत्रेयी|Maitreyī]]''' and '''[[कात्यायनी|Kātyāyanī]],''' are mentioned in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx6_ve2_704> ii. 4, 1;<br> iv. 5, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> which concludes<ref name=fx7_ve2_704> vi. 4, 33 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 5, 4 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> with a passage ascribing to [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]] [[वाजसनेय|Vājasaneya]] the ‘white Yajus’ (''śuklāni yajūṃṣi''). It is remarkable that [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]] is never mentioned in any other Vedic text outside the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] except the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx8_ve2_704> ix. 7;<br> xiii. 1.</ref> where, however, both reference are merely transcripts from the Śatapatha.<ref name=fx9_ve2_704> Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 132, n. *;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 374.</ref> It has  been supposed by Oldenberg<ref name=fx10_ve2_704> ''Buddha,''^5 34, n. 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 120 ''et seq.;<br> Indische Studien,'' 1, 173;<br> 13, 265269;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xxx ''et seq.;<br>'' von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 188.</ref> and others that [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]] belonged to '''[[विदेह|Videha]],''' but despite the legend of Janaka's patronage of him, his association with '''Uddālaka,''' the '''Kuru-[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]],''' renders this doubtful.

याज्या
<u>'''Yājyā'''</u> (scil. ṛc, ‘verse’) denotes the words uttered at the moment of offering the sacrifice, ‘consecrating sacrificial formula,’ in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_705> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 5, 2, 1;<br> 6, 10, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 20;<br> xx. 12, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_705> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 8;<br> 11, 10;<br> ii. 13, 2;<br> 26, 3. 5. 6;<br> 40, 8;<br> iii. 32, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 2, 19;<br> iii. 4, 4, 2;<br> vii. 2, 7, 11, etc.</ref>

यातु-धान
<u>'''Yātu-dhāna'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_706> i. 35, 10;<br> x. 87, 2. 3. 7. 10;<br> 120, 4.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_706> Av. i. 7, 1;<br> iv. 3, 4;<br> vi. 13, 3;<br> 32, 2;<br> vii. 70, 2;<br> xix. 46, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 14;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 7;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 4, 1, 29, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘sorcerer,’ ‘wizard,’ or ‘magician.’ The sense of the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_706> vii. 104, 15.</ref> is clearly unfavourable to sorcery. The feminine, Yātudhānī, is also found in the Rigveda and later.<ref name=fx4_ve2_706> Rv. i. 191, 8;<br> x. 118, 8;<br> Av. i. 28, 24;<br> ii. 14, 3;<br> iv. 9, 9;<br> 18, 17;<br> xix. 37, 8, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 26, 65 ''et seq.''</ref>

यातु-विद्
<u>'''Yātu-vid,'''</u> denoting in the plural ‘those who know sorcery,’ designates the Atharvaveda in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_707> x. 5, 2, 20. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' xxii.;<br> ''Atharvaveda,'' 1. 8, 9, 23.</ref>

याद्व
<u>'''Yādva,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Yadu,'''’ is used of the Yadu prince in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_708> vii. 19, 8.</ref> while the largesse of the Yādvas<ref name=fx2_ve2_708> Rv. viii. 6, 46. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 5, 142.</ref> is alluded to elsewhere. In another passage a beast (''[[पशु|paśu]]'') of the Yadus or Yādvas is mentioned.<ref name=fx3_ve2_708> Rv. viii. 1, 31.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 3;<br> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 37.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Yadu.''' 

यान
<u>'''Yāna'''</u> denotes ‘vehicle’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_709> iv. 43, 6.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_709> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 3, 7;<br> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 3, 10;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 12, 3, etc.</ref>

याम
<u>'''Yāma,'''</u> used in the plural, denotes in one passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_710> vi. 21, 2.</ref> according to Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve2_710> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 1''d.''</ref> the planets among which the sun (''[[भग|bhaga]]'') wanders. But both Bloomfield<ref name=fx3_ve2_710> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 30.</ref> and Whitney<ref name=fx4_ve2_710> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 396.</ref> accept the sense--the regular one in the later language--of ‘night watches.’

यामन्
<u>'''Yāman'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_711> iv. 24. 2;<br> vii. 66, 5;<br> 85, 1;<br> ix. 64, 10;<br> x. 78, 6;<br> 80, 5.</ref> a ‘march’ or ‘expedition’ in war.

यायावर
<u>'''Yāyāvara'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_712> Literally, ‘wandering about,’ from the intensive of ''yā,'' ‘to go.’</ref> denotes a person of no fixed abode in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx2_ve2_712> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 1, 7;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xix. 12.</ref>

याव
<u>'''Yāva.'''</u> See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

यास्क
<u>'''Yāska'''</u> (‘descendant of Yaska’) is mentioned in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_714> ii. 5, 21;<br> iv. 5, 27 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]). ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 128.</ref> as a contemporary of '''[[आसुरायण|Āsurāyaṇa]]''' and a teacher of '''[[भारद्वाज|Bhāradvāja]].''' Whether [[यास्क|Yāska]], author of the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_714> [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]] Prātiśākhya, xvii. 25;<br> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 25, 26, etc.;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 17, 103;<br> 3, 396;<br> 8, 243, etc.;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 41, n. 30.</ref> was the same person, it is, of course, impossible to say.

यु
<u>'''Yu,'''</u> appearing in the dual in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 7, 4, 10), seems to mean ‘yoke animals.’ <br>==Foot Notes==

युक्त
<u>'''Yukta'''</u> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vi. 7, 4, 8; xii. 4, 1, 2) denotes a ‘yoke’ of oxen. ''Cf.'' 1. '''Yuga.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

युक्ताश्व
<u>'''Yuktāśva'''</u> is the name of a man who is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_717> xi. 8, 8.</ref> as the seer of a Sāman, or chant. He is said to have exposed a pair of twins,<ref name=fx2_ve2_717> ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 314, n., whose view is that of Sāyaṇa on the passage. ''Cf.'' '''Yama.'''</ref> but Hopkins<ref name=fx3_ve2_717> ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 61, 62.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie.'' 2, 160.</ref> thinks that the reference is only to an exchange of children.

युग
<u>'''1. Yuga'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_718> i. 115, 2;<br> 184, 3;<br> ii. 39, 4;<br> iii. 53, 17;<br> viii. 80, 7;<br> x. 60, 8;<br> 101, 3, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_718> Av. iv. 1, 40;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 1, 24. 34;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 1, 3, etc.</ref> denotes ‘yoke.’ ''Cf.'' [[रथ|Ratha]].

युग
<u>'''2. Yuga'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_719> ''Yuge-yuge,'' ‘in every age,’ i. 139, 8;<br> iii. 26, 3;<br> vi. 8, 5;<br> 15, 8;<br> 36, 5;<br> ix. 94, 12;<br> ''uttarā yugāni,'' ‘future ages,’ iii. 33, 8;<br> x. 10, 10;<br> ''pūrvāṇi yugāni,'' vii. 70, 4;<br> ''uttare yuge,'' x. 72, 1, etc. In i. 92, 11;<br> 103, 4;<br> 115, 2;<br> 124, 2;<br> 144, 4, etc., the phrase ‘generations of men’ (''manṣyā, manuṣaḥ, janānām'') are referred to. See Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 45, 46.</ref> frequently denotes a ‘generation’; but the expression ''daśame yuge'' applied to '''[[दीर्घतमस्|Dīrghatamas]]''' in one passage<ref name=fx2_ve2_719> i. 158, 6. Wilson, Translation, 2, 104, n., suggests that ''yuga'' here means a lustrum of five years;<br> but the tenth decade is far more likely, as [[दीर्घतमस्|Dīrghatamas]] is said to be ‘aged’ (''jujurvān'').</ref> must mean ‘tenth decade’ of life.<br><br>There is no reference in the older Vedic texts to the five-year cycle (see '''[[संवत्सर|Saṃvatsara]]'''). The quotation from the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_719> xvii. 13, 17.</ref> given in the St. Petersburg Dictionary, and by Zimmer<ref name=fx4_ve2_719> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 368.</ref> and others, is merely a citation from a modern text in the commentary on that work.<br><br>Nor do the older Vedic texts know of any series of Yugas or ages such as are usual later. In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx5_ve2_719> viii. 2, 21.</ref> there are mentioned in order a hundred years, an ''ayuta'' (10,000?), and then two, three, or four Yugas: the inference from this seems to be that a Yuga means more than an ''ayuta,'' but is not very  certain. Zimmer<ref name=fx6_ve2_719> ''Op. cit.,'' 371.</ref> adduces a passage from the Rigveda,<ref name=fx7_ve2_719> viii. 101, 4 = Av. x. 8, 3.</ref> but the reference there, whatever it may be,<ref name=fx8_ve2_719> ''Cf.'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 1, 1, with Keith's note;<br> Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 253.</ref> is certainly not to the four ages (''cf.'' also '''[[त्रियुग|Triyuga]]''').<ref name=fx9_ve2_719> In Rv. x. 72, 2, ''devānāṃ pūrvye yuge,'' ‘in the earlier age of the gods,’ occurs.</ref> The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx10_ve2_719> iii. 12, 9, 2. ''Cf.'' Muir, 12, 42, n. 66.</ref> recognizes long periods of time--''e.g.,'' one of 100,000 years.<br><br>To the four ages, Kali, [[द्वापर|Dvāpara]], Tretā, and [[कृत|Kṛta]], there is no certain reference in Vedic literature, though the names occur as the designations of throws at dice (see '''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]]'''). In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx11_ve2_719> vii. 15, 4 (in the description of the merits of exertion): ‘A man while lying is the Kali;<br> moving himself, he is the [[द्वापर|Dvāpara]];<br> rising, he is the Tretā;<br> walking, he becomes the Kṛta’ (''Kaliḥ śayāno bhavati saṃjihānas tu Dvāparaḥ | uttiṣṭhaṃs Tretā bhavati, Kṛtaṃ saṃpadyate caran||'').</ref> the names occur, but it is not clear that the ages are really meant. Haug<ref name=fx12_ve2_719> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], 2, 464, criticized by Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 319.</ref> thought that the dice were meant: this view is at least as probable as the alternative explanation, which is accepted by Weber,<ref name=fx13_ve2_719> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 286;<br> 9, 315 ''et seq.''</ref> Roth,<ref name=fx14_ve2_719> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 460.</ref> Wilson,<ref name=fx15_ve2_719> ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1851, 99.</ref> Max Müller,<ref name=fx16_ve2_719> ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 412.</ref> and Muir.<ref name=fx17_ve2_719> ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 48, n. 86.</ref> Roth, indeed, believes that the verse is an interpolation; but in any case it must be remembered that the passage is from a late book of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. Four ages--[[पुष्य|Puṣya]], [[द्वापर|Dvāpara]], Khārvā, and [[कृत|Kṛta]]--are mentioned in the late Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx18_ve2_719> v. 6.</ref> and the [[द्वापर|Dvāpara]] in the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx19_ve2_719> i. 1, 28;<br> Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 151, n. 166;<br> Windisch, ''Buddha und Māra,'' 151.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 367371;<br> Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 91. A quite different theory of the Yugas is given by Shamasastry, ''Gavām Ayana,'' 141 ''et seq.,'' but his whole theory is quite impossible. Weber once (''Indian Literature,'' 113, n. 127) found the mention of the quinquennial Yuga in Rv. iii. 55, 18, but that passage refers to the five or six seasons (see Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 382, n.), while i. 25, 8, merely alludes to the intercalary month. Weber also (''op. cit.,'' 70, 247) considers that the Yugas are derived from the phases of the moon, but this idea was long since disposed of by Roth, ''Die Lehre von den vier Weltaltern'' (Tübingen, 1860).</ref> 

युद्ध
<u>'''Yuddha'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_720> x. 54, 2.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_720> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 9, 1;<br> Aitareva [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 39, 1. 2;<br> vi. 36, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 1, 5, 6;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 1, etc.</ref> denotes ‘battle.’ The more usual word earlier<ref name=fx3_ve2_720> Rv. i. 53, 7;<br> 59, 1;<br> v. 25, 6;<br> vi. 46, 11, etc.;<br> Av. i. 24, 1;<br> iv. 24, 7;<br> vi. 66, 1;<br> 103, 3, etc.;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2, 4, 16, etc.</ref> is Yudh.

युधां-श्रौष्टि औग्र-सैन्य
<u>'''Yudhāṃ-śrauṣṭi Augra-sainya'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[उग्रसेन|Ugrasena]]'''’) is the name, in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_721> viii. 21, 7. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 8. The Paurāṇic form is [[युद्ध|Yuddha]]-muṣṭi.</ref> of a king who was anointed by '''[[पर्वत|Parvata]]''' and '''[[नारद|Nārada]].'''

युध्यामधि
<u>'''Yudhyāmadhi'''</u> is apparently the name of a king who was defeated by '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]].''' The mention of him occurring only in the verses added at the end of the hymn celebrating the victory of [[सुदास्|Sudās]] over the ten kings<ref name=fx1_ve2_722> Rv. vii. 18, 24. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 173.</ref> can claim little authenticity as a notice of [[सुदास्|Sudās]].

युवति
<u>'''Yuvati'''</u> is the ordinary expression for a ‘young woman’ or ‘maiden’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_723> i. 118, 5;<br> ii. 35, 4;<br> iii. 54, 14;<br> iv. 18, 8;<br> v. 2, 1. 2;<br> ix. 86, 16;<br> x. 30, 5.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_723> Av. xiv. 2, 61;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 1, 9;<br> 2, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 1, 9, 6;<br> 4, 3, 8, etc.</ref>

यूथ
<u>'''Yūtha'''</u> is the word for ‘herd’ of cows in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_724> i. 10, 2;<br> 81, 7;<br> iii. 55, 17;<br> iv. 2, 18;<br> 38, 5;<br> v. 41, 19;<br> ix. 71, 9, etc.<br><br>''Cf. yūthya,'' ‘of the herd,’ viii. 56, 4;<br> ix. 15, 4;<br> x. 23, 4.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_724> Av. v. 20, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 7, 2, 1, etc.</ref>

यूप
<u>'''Yūpa'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_725> v. 2, 7 (of '''Sunaḥśepa''').</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_725> Av. ix. 6, 22;<br> xii. 1, 38;<br> xiii. 1, 47;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 3, 4, 1;<br> vii. 2, 1, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 17;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]];<br> ix. 10, 2, etc.</ref> means a ‘post,’ usually that to which the sacrificial victim was tied. It also designates the post to which the door of the house was attached ('''[[दुर्य|Durya]]''').<ref name=fx3_ve2_725> Rv. i. 51, 14. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 153.</ref> 

यूषन्
<u>'''Yūṣan,'''</u> occurring in the description of the horse-sacrifice in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_726> i. 162, 13.</ref> and the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx2_ve2_726> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 3, 11, 1. 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxv. 9.</ref> denotes the ‘broth’ which was made from the flesh of the sacrificial animal, and was no doubt used as food. Vessels employed for holding it, '''[[पात्र|Pātra]]''' and '''[[आसेचन|Āsecana]],''' are mentioned. Another form of the word, found in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx3_ve2_726> vi. 3, 11, 1. 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 271;<br> Schrader, ''Prehisteric Antiquities,'' 316.</ref> is Yūs, which corresponds to the Latin ''jus.''

येवाष
<u>'''Yevāṣa'''</u> is the name of a destructive insect in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_727> v. 23, 7. 8.</ref> The form [[यवाष|Yavāṣa]] is found in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve2_727> xxx. 1 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 462). The same form occurs in the Gaṇas, ''kumudādi'' and ''prekṣādi'' (Pāṇini, iv. 2, 80). ''Cf.'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 8, 1, where [[यवाष|Yavāṣa]] should be read;<br> Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitā, xlvi. 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[वृष|Vṛṣa]].'''

योक्त्र
<u>'''Yoktra'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_728> iii. 33, 13 v. 33, 2.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_728> Av. iii. 30 6;<br> vii. 78, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 4, 3, [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 3, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 1, 13;<br> vi. 4, 3, 7, etc.</ref> denotes the ‘thongs’ used for yoking the chariot or cart.

योग
<u>'''Yoga'''</u> denotes the yoke of oxen or horses drawing a car in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_729> vi. 91, 1 (yokes of six or eight);<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 2, etc. ''Cf.'' '''[[सीर|Sīra]].'''</ref> and the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_729> iv. 3, 11 (''[[रथ|ratha]]-yogāḥ,'' ‘chariot teams’).</ref>

योजन
<u>'''Yojana'''</u> occurs frequently in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_730> i. 123, 8;<br> ii. 16, 3;<br> x. 78, 7;<br> 86, 20, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_730> Av. iv. 26, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 9;<br> iii. 8, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 2, 7, etc. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 363, who finds in Rv. i. 123, 8, ''[[योजन|yojana]]'' as a division of time equivalent to the '''[[मुहूर्त|Muhūrta]].''' But this is most improbable.</ref> as a measure of distance,<ref name=fx3_ve2_730> That is, the distance driven in one ‘harnessing’ (without unyoking), a ‘stage.’</ref> but there is no reference defining its real  length. Later it is reckoned at four '''Krośas,''' or about nine miles.<ref name=fx4_ve2_730> Sometimes calculated at 8 krośas, or 18 miles. The estimate of 2(1/2) miles is also found.</ref>

योध
<u>'''Yodha'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_731> i. 143, 5;<br> iii. 39, 4;<br> vi. 25, 5;<br> x. 78, 3.</ref> means ‘fighter,’ ‘warrior,’ ‘soldier.’

योषन्
<u>'''Yoṣan, Yoṣaṇā, Yoṣā, Yoṣit.'''</u> all denote ‘young woman,’ ‘maiden,’ as an object of affection, and as meet for wedlock.<ref name=fx1_ve2_732> ''[[योषन्|Yoṣan]],'' Rv. iv. 5, 5;<br> ''Yoṣaṇā,'' iii. 52, 3;<br> 56, 5;<br> 62, 8;<br> vii. 95, 3. etc.;<br> ''Yoṣā,'' i. 48, 5;<br> 92, 11;<br> iii. 33, 10;<br> 38, 8, etc.;<br> Av. xii. 3, 29;<br> xiv. 1, 56, etc.;<br> ''Yoṣit,'' Rv. ix. 28, 4;<br> Av. vi. 101, 1, etc. ''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 418.</ref> So these terms are often opposed in the Brāhmaṇas to '''[[वृषन्|Vṛṣan]],''' ‘male,’ in the general sense of ‘female,’<ref name=fx2_ve2_732> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 5, 15 (''yoṣā''), and often in the Brāhmaṇas.</ref> but they also occur in the sense of ‘wife,’<ref name=fx3_ve2_732> Av. xii. 3, 29 (''yoṣā'').</ref> or ‘daughter,’<ref name=fx4_ve2_732> So ''yoṣā'' in Rv. i. 117, 20. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 310.</ref> or merely ‘girl.’<ref name=fx5_ve2_732> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 1, 7.</ref> See '''[[स्त्री|Strī]].'''

यौगं-धरि
<u>'''Yaugaṃ-dhari,'''</u> ‘descendant of Yugaṃdhara,’ is the name of a king of the '''Sālvas''' in the Mantrapāṭha (ii. 11, 12).<br>==Foot Notes==

यौवन
<u>'''Yauvana,'''</u> ‘youth,’ is found in the Atharvaveda (xviii. 4, 50), where it is opposed to ‘old age.’<br>==Foot Notes==

रक्षितृ
<u>'''Rakṣitṛ,'''</u> ‘protector,’ ‘guardian,’ occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_735> i. 89, 1. 5;<br> ii. 39, 6;<br> guardian of Soma, vi. 7, 7;<br> of the dogs of Yama, x. 14, 11, etc.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_735> Av. iii. 27, 1;<br> xii. 3, 55;<br> xix. 15, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 2, 5, etc.</ref> usually in a metaphorical sense.

रघट्
<u>'''Raghaṭ'''</u> occurs once in the plural in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_736> viii. 7, 24.</ref> where the Paippalāda recension reads ''vaghaṭah.'' Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_736> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' 1''a.''</ref> once con-  jectured ''raghavaḥ,'' ‘swift,’ as the correct reading. Bloomfield,<ref name=fx3_ve2_736> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 580.</ref> who in his translation explains the word as ‘falcons,’ in his notes inclines to think Roth's conjecture likely. Ludwig<ref name=fx4_ve2_736> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 504.</ref> suggests ‘bees’ as the meaning. Possibly some kind of bird may be intended.<ref name=fx5_ve2_736> Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v. Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 501.</ref>

रजत
<u>'''Rajata'''</u> as an adjective with '''[[हिरण्य|Hiraṇya]]'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_737> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 5, 1, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, x. 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 4, 4, 7;<br> xiii. 4, 2, 10;<br> xiv. 1, 3, 4, etc.</ref> designates ‘silver,’ and ornaments ('''[[रुक्म|Rukma]]'''),<ref name=fx2_ve2_737> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 8, 3, 11.</ref> dishes ('''[[पात्र|Pātra]]'''),<ref name=fx3_ve2_737> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 9, 7;<br> iii. 9, 6, 5.</ref> and coins ('''[[निष्क|Niṣka]]''')<ref name=fx4_ve2_737> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 1, 14.</ref> ‘made of silver’ are mentioned. The word is also used alone as a substantive to denote ‘silver.’<ref name=fx5_ve2_737> Av. v. 28, 1;<br> xiii. 4, 51;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 12, 2;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 17, 7;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 17, 3;<br> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 180;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 56;<br> Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 151, 152;<br> Vincent Smith, ''Indian Antiquary,'' 34, 230.</ref>

रजन कोणेय
<u>'''Rajana Koṇeya,'''</u> or '''[[कौणेय|Kauṇeya]],''' is the name of a teacher mentioned in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_738> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 8, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxvii. 2 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 474).</ref> It is said in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve2_738> xi. 1 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 474).</ref> that '''[[क्रतुजित् जानकि|Kratujit Jānaki]]''' successfully sacrificed for him when he desired to obtain eyesight. He is also mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_738> xiii. 4, 11. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 58, n. 2.</ref> where the name of his son, '''[[उग्रदेव|Ugradeva]] [[राजनि|Rājani]],''' also occurs.<ref name=fx4_ve2_738> He was a leper, and the '''[[रजनी|Rajanī]]''' is used against leprosy, Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 266.</ref>

रजनी
<u>'''Rajanī'''</u> is found in one passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_739> i. 23, 1. ''Cf.'' Roth in Whitney's Translation of the Atharvaveda, 24;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 267.</ref> where it denotes some sort of plant, probably so called because of its  power of ‘colouring’ (from ''rañj,'' ‘to colour’). The species cannot be identified owing to the untrustworthiness of the later authorities who attempt its identification.

रजयित्री
<u>'''Rajayitrī,'''</u> a ‘female dyer,’ is included in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_740> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 7, 1.</ref>

रजस्
<u>'''1. Rajas'''</u> denotes the region of the atmosphere between heaven and earth in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_741> i. 56, 5;<br> 62, 5;<br> 84, 1;<br> 124, 5;<br> 168, 6;<br> 187, 4;<br> ii. 40, 3;<br> vi. 62, 9, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_741> Av. iv. 25, 2;<br> vii. 25, 1;<br> 41, 1;<br> x. 3, 9;<br> xiii. 2, 8. 43;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 5, 4, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 44, etc.</ref> The atmosphere, like the sky ('''Div'''), is divided into three regions,<ref name=fx3_ve2_741> Rv. iv. 53, 5;<br> v. 69, 1;<br> ix. 74, 6;<br> x. 45, 3;<br> 123, 8;<br> Av. xiii. 1, 11, etc. In Rv. i. 164, 6, six ‘regions’ are mentioned.</ref> but more normally into two, the ‘earthly’ (''pārthiva'')<ref name=fx4_ve2_741> Rv. i. 81, 5;<br> 90, 7;<br> 154, 1;<br> vi. 49, 3;<br> viii. 88, 5;<br> ix. 72, 8, etc.</ref> and the ‘heavenly’ (''[[दिव्य|divya]]'' or ''divaḥ'').<ref name=fx5_ve2_741> Rv. iv. 53, 3;<br> i. 110, 6. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 10;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> In some passages<ref name=fx6_ve2_741> Rv. i. 166, 3;<br> iii. 62, 16;<br> x. 75. 7.</ref> the word refers in the plural to the dusty fields on earth.

रजस्
<u>'''2. Rajas'''</u> in one passage of the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_742> ''Rajaḥ-śaya,'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, v. 8;<br> ''rajāśaya,'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 2, 11, 2 (Sāyaṇa on [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 23, 2);<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 2, 7;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ii. 8.</ref> clearly means ‘silver,’ like '''[[रजत|Rajata]].''' It is also taken in this sense in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_742> x. 105, 7.</ref> by Zimmer,<ref name=fx3_ve2_742> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 55, 56.</ref> but this interpretation is doubtful.

रजस
<u>'''Rajasa'''</u> occurs once in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_743> x. 2, 25.</ref> apparently as the name of a kind of ‘fish.’ Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve2_743> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 621;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveḍa, 624.</ref> however, understood it as an adjective meaning ‘impure.’ 

रजि
<u>'''Raji'''</u> occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_744> vi. 26, 6. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 156;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' where Roth compares a conjecture in Av. xx. 128, 13</ref> seemingly as the name of a king, or perhaps demon, slain by Indra for '''[[पिठीनस्|Piṭhīnas]].'''

रज्जव्य
<u>'''Rajjavya'''</u> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vi. 7, 1, 28) den ‘cord’ or ‘rope.’<br>==Foot Notes==

रज्जु
<u>'''Rajju'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_746> i. 162, 8 (''śīrṣaṇyā [[रशना|raśanā]] rajjuḥ,'' referring to the horse presumably means the head harness).</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_746> Av. iii. 11, 8;<br> vi. 121, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 1, 7;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 1, 14;<br> x. 2, 3, 8;<br> xi. 3, 1, 1, etc.</ref> denotes ‘rope.’ In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_746> iv. 3, 2;<br> xix. 47, 7, 8;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 368.</ref> the serpent is called the ‘toothed rope’ (''[[रज्जु|rajju]] datvatī'').

रज्जु-दाल
<u>'''Rajju-dāla'''</u> is the name of a tree (''Cordia myxa'' or ''latifolia'') the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_747> xiii. 4, 4, 6. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 373, n. 2.</ref>

रज्जु-सर्ज
<u>'''Rajju-sarja,'''</u> ‘rope-maker,’ is one of the victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_748> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 3, 1.</ref>

रण
<u>'''Raṇa'''</u> denotes properly the ‘joy’ of battle, then ‘battle,’ ‘combat’ itself in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_749> i. 61, 1. 9;<br> 74, 3;<br> 119, 3;<br> vi. 16, 15, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_749> Av. v. 2, 4, etc.</ref>

रत्न
<u>'''Ratna'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_750> i. 20, 7;<br> 35, 8;<br> 41, 6;<br> 125, 1;<br> 140, 11;<br> 141, 10;<br> ii. 38, 1, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_750> Av. v. 1, 7;<br> vii. 14, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 1, 1.</ref> denotes a precious object, not specifically a ‘jewel,’ as in post-Vedic literature.

रत्नि
<u>'''Ratni,'''</u> ‘ell,’ occurring in the Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iv. 4) is a corruption of '''[[अरत्नि|Aratni]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

रत्निन्
<u>'''Ratnin,'''</u> ‘receiving gifts,’ is the term applied to those people of the royal entourage in whose houses the [[रत्न|Ratna]]-[[हविस्|havis]], a  special rite, was performed in the course of the '''[[राजसूय|Rājasūya]]''' or ‘royal consecration.’ The list given in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_752> i. 8, 9, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_752> i. 7, 3, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> consists of the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] (''i.e.,'' the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]]), the [[राजन्य|Rājanya]], the [[महिषी|Mahiṣī]] (the first wife of the king), the '''Vāvāta''' (the favourite wife of the king), the Parivṛktī (the discarded wife), the [[सेनानी|Senānī]], ‘commander of the army’; the [[सूत|Sūta]], ‘charioteer’; the Grāmaṇī, ‘village headman’; the [[क्षत्तृ|Kṣattṛ]], ‘chamberlain’; the [[संग्रहीतृ|Saṃgrahītṛ]], ‘charioteer’ or ‘treasurer’; the [[भागदुघ|Bhāgadugha]], ‘collector of taxes’ or ‘divider of food’; and the Akṣāvāpa, ‘superintender of dicing’ or ‘thrower of dice.’ In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_752> v. 3, 1, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> the order is [[सेनानी|Senānī]]; [[पुरोहित|Purohita]]; Mahisī; [[सूत|Sūta]]; Grāmaṇī; [[क्षत्तृ|Kṣattṛ]]; Saṃgrahitṛ; [[भागदुघ|Bhāgadugha]]; Akṣāvāpa; Go-nikartana, ‘slayer of cows’ or ‘huntsman’; and [[पालागल|Pālāgala]], ‘courier’; the ‘discarded wife’ being mentioned as forbidden to stay at home<ref name=fx4_ve2_752> According to Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 3, 35, she goes to a Brahmin's house, where she shares his inviolability and exemption from jurisdiction.</ref> on the day of the ceremony of offering a pap for Nirṛti in her house. In the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx5_ve2_752> ii. 6, 5;<br> iv. 3, 8.</ref> the list is [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] (''i.e.,'' [[पुरोहित|Purohita]]); [[राजन्|Rājan]]; [[महिषी|Mahiṣī]]; Parivṛktī; [[सेनानी|Senānī]]; [[संग्रहीतृ|Saṃgrahītṛ]]; [[क्षत्तृ|Kṣattṛ]]; [[सूत|Sūta]]; Vaiśyagrāmaṇī; [[भागदुघ|Bhāgadugha]]; Takṣa-Rathakārau, ‘carpenter and chariot-maker’; Akṣāvāpa; and Go-vikarta. The [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx6_ve2_752> xv. 4.</ref> substitutes Go-[[व्यछ|vyacha]] for Govikarta, and omits Takṣa-Rathakārau.<br><br>It will be seen that the list is essentially that of the royal household, and of the king's servants in the administration of the country, though the exact sense of '''[[संग्रहीतृ|Saṃgrahītṛ]], [[भागदुघ|Bhāgadugha]], [[सूत|Sūta]], Grāmaṇī, [[क्षत्तृ|Kṣattṛ]],''' is open to reasonable doubt, mainly as to whether public officers or private servants<ref name=fx7_ve2_752> Similarly Akṣāvāpa is either the man who dices for the king--''i.e.,'' a professional dicer who plays with the king or watches his play--or a public officer who superintends the gambling halls of the state and collects the revenue, as was regularly done later on. Early English history shows similar evolution of household officers into ministers of state.</ref> are meant, for the names are of uncertain significance. A briefer list of eight '''Vīras,''' ‘heroes,’ as among the friends of the king,  is given in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]:<ref name=fx8_ve2_752> xix. 1, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 200;<br> ''Über den [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]],'' 4;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 128;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 58-65;<br> Hopkins, ''Trañsactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 30, n. 2.</ref> brother, son, [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], [[महिषी|Mahiṣī]], [[सूत|Sūta]], Grāmaṇī, [[क्षत्तृ|Kṣattṛ]], and [[संग्रहीतृ|Saṃgrahītṛ]].

रथ
<u>'''Ratha'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_753> i. 20, 3;<br> iii. 15, 5;<br> iv. 4, 10;<br> 16, 20;<br> 36, 2;<br> 43, 25, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_753> Av. v. 14, 5;<br> x. 1, 8: [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 12, 3, etc.</ref> denotes ‘chariot’ as opposed to '''Anas,''' ‘cart,’ though the distinction is not absolute. Of differences in the structure of the two we have no information, except that the '''Kha,''' or nave hole, in the wheel of the chariot was greater than in that of the cart.<ref name=fx3_ve2_753> viii. 91, 7, with Sāyaṇa's note;<br> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 333.</ref><br><br>The chariot has, as a rule, two wheels ('''[[चक्र|Cakra]]'''), to which reference is frequently made.<ref name=fx4_ve2_753> ''Cf.'' Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 16, 5;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 16, 7;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 4.</ref> The wheel consisted of a rim ('''Pavi'''), a felly ('''[[प्रधि|Pradhi]]'''), spokes ('''Ara'''),<ref name=fx5_ve2_753> ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 32, 15;<br> 141, 9;<br> v. 13, 6;<br> 58, 5;<br> viii. 20, 14;<br> 77, 3;<br> x. 78, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, x. 4, etc.</ref> and a nave ('''[[नभ्य|Nabhya]]'''). The rim and the felly together constitute the '''Nemi.''' The hole in the nave is called '''Kha:''' into it the end of the axle was inserted; but there is some uncertainty whether '''[[आणि|Āṇi]]''' denotes the extremity of the axle that was inserted in the nave, or the lynch-pin used to keep that extremity in the wheel. Sometimes a solid wheel was used.<ref name=fx6_ve2_753> ''Cf.'' '''Pradhī.'''</ref><br><br>The axle ('''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]]''') was, in some cases, made of '''[[अरटु|Araṭu]]''' wood;<ref name=fx7_ve2_753> Rv. viii. 46, 27;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 247, n.</ref> round its ends the wheels revolved. To the axle was attached the body of the chariot ('''[[कोश|Kośa]]'''). This part is also denoted by the word '''[[वन्धुर|Vandhura]],''' which more precisely means the ‘seat’ of the chariot. The epithet ''tri-[[वन्धुर|vandhura]]'' is used of the chariot of the Aśvins, seemingly to correspond with another of its epithets, ''tri-[[चक्र|cakra]]:'' perhaps, as Weber<ref name=fx8_ve2_753> ''Proceedings of the Berlin Academy,'' 1898, 564;<br> Virchow, ''Zeitschrift für Ethnologie'' 5, 200. ''Cf.'' note 21.</ref> thinks, a chariot with three seats and three wheels was a real form of vehicle; but Zimmer<ref name=fx9_ve2_753> ''Op.'' ''cit.'' iii.</ref> considers that the vehicle was purely mythical. '''[[गर्त|Garta]]''' also denotes the seat of the warrior. <br><br>At right angles to the axle was the pole of the chariot ('''[[ईषा|Īṣā]], Praüga'''). Normally there was, it seems, one pole, on either side of which the horses were harnessed, a yoke ('''Yuga''') being laid across their necks; the pole was passed through the hole in the yoke (called Kha<ref name=fx10_ve2_753> This seems to be the sense of Rv. viii. 91, 7;<br> but it has also been taken as the opening in the yoke through which the ox's head passed (the Homeric ). See Cowell's note on Wilson's translation;<br> Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 237, n.</ref> or [[तर्द्मन्|Tardman]]),<ref name=fx11_ve2_753> Av. xiv. 1, 40.</ref> the yoke and the pole then being tied together.<ref name=fx12_ve2_753> Rv. iii. 6, 6;<br> v. 56, 4;<br> x. 60, 8.</ref><br><br>The horses were tied by the neck (''grīvā''), where the yoke was placed, and also at the shoulder, presumably by traces fastened to a bar of wood at right angles to the pole, or fastened to the ends of the pole, if that is to be regarded, as it probably should, as of triangular shape, wide at the foot and coming to a point at the tip.<ref name=fx13_ve2_753> Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 249, thinks that ''[[वाणी|vāṇī]]'' in Rv. i. 119, 5, denotes the two bars of wood to which the traces were fastened. This is also the view of Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' Bo7htlingk's Lexicon, and Grassmann. The word may mean ‘two voices’ (Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 162).</ref> The traces seem to be denoted by '''[[रश्मि|Raśmi]]''' and '''[[रशना|Raśanā]].''' These words also denote the ‘reins,’ which were fastened to the bit (perhaps ''[[शिप्रा|śiprā]]'') in the horse's mouth. The driver controlled the horses by reins, and urged them on with a whip (''Kaśā'').<ref name=fx14_ve2_753> Rv. v. 83, 3;<br> vi. 75, 6.</ref> The girths of the horse were called Kakṣyā.<ref name=fx15_ve2_753> Rv. x. 10, 13;<br> ''kakṣya-prā,'' ‘filling out the girths’ (''i.e.,'' ‘well fed’), is an epithet of Indra's horses, i. 10, 3.</ref><br><br>The normal number of horses seems to have been two, but three or four<ref name=fx16_ve2_753> Three horses are mentioned in Rv. x. 33, 5, and [[प्रष्टि|Praṣṭi]] in Rv. i. 39, 6;<br> viii. 7, 28, etc., may have the sense of ‘third horse.’ See also Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, 4, 11;<br> 2, 4, 9, etc.;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 13, 12. For four horses, ''cf.'' Rv. ii. 18, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 3, 17;<br> 1, 4, 11;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 21, n. 1.</ref> were often used. It is uncertain whether, in these cases, the extra horse was attached in front or at the side; possibly both modes were in use. Even five steeds could be employed.<ref name=fx17_ve2_753> ''Rathaḥ pañcavāhī,'' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 3. In the parallel passage the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 7, 2, has ''praṣṭivāhī.''</ref> Horses were normally used for chariots, but the ass (''[[गर्दभ|gardabha]]'')<ref name=fx18_ve2_753> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 9, 4.</ref> or mule (''aśvatarī'')<ref name=fx19_ve2_753> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 2, 1;<br> v. 13, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 9, 1.</ref> are also mentioned. The ox was employed for drawing carts, and in fact derived its  name, '''[[अनड्वाह्|Anaḍvāh]],''' from this use. Sometimes a poor man had to be content with a single steed, which then ran between two shafts.<ref name=fx20_ve2_753> Rv. x. 101, 11;<br> 131, 3, and vi. 15, 19;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 13, 12;<br> xxi. 13, 8, etc.</ref><br><br>In the chariot the driver stood on the right, while the warrior was on the left, as indicated by his name, '''Savyeṣṭha''' or '''[[सव्यष्ठा|Savyaṣṭhā]],'''<ref name=fx21_ve2_753> This is the case in Av. viii. 8, 23, with [[सव्यष्ठा|Savyaṣṭhā]], and in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 7, 9, 1, ''savyeṣṭha-[[सारथि|sārathi]]'' occurs as a compound where the sense is certainly ‘the warrior and the charioteer.’ See also Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 1, 8, and Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 62, n. 1. The Greek notices speak of two warriors and a charioteer. ''Cf.'' the Aśvins' car with its three seats. See von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 435.</ref> He could also sit when he wanted, for the chariot had seats, and an archer would naturally prefer to sit while shooting his arrows.<br><br>The dimensions of the chariot are given in the Śulba [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx22_ve2_753> vi. 5 (Bürk, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 56, 344, 345).</ref> of Āpastamba at 188 Aṅgulis (finger-breadths) for the pole, 104 for the axle, and 86 for the yoke. The material used in its construction was wood, except for the rim of the wheel.<ref name=fx23_ve2_753> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 3, 16. The chariot used at the bridal procession was made of Śalmali wood, Rv. x. 85, 20.<br><br>For the chariot in the Epic, see Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 235-262;<br> and ''cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 338, 339;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 245-252;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 38, n. 1.</ref><br><br>Many other parts of the chariot are mentioned, their names being often obscure in meaning: see '''[[अङ्क|Aṅka]], [[न्य्अङ्क|Nyaṅka]], [[उद्धि|Uddhi]], [[पक्षस्|Pakṣas]], [[पातल्य|Pātalya]], [[भुरिज्|Bhurij]], [[रथोपस्थ|Rathopastha]], [[रथवाहन|Rathavāhana]].'''

रथ-कार
<u>'''Ratha-kāra,'''</u> ‘chariot-maker,’ is mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_754> iii. 5, 6.</ref> as one of those who are to be subject to the king, seeming to stand generally as an example of the industrial population. He is also referred to in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx2_ve2_754> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 13;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 17;<br> xxx. 6.</ref> and in the Brāhmaṇas:<ref name=fx3_ve2_754> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 4, 8;<br> iii. 4, 2, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 2, 17.</ref> in all these passages, as well a probably in the Atharvaveda also, the [[रथकार|Rathakāra]] already forms a caste. The  later system<ref name=fx4_ve2_754> [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]], i. 95. On the special position, in the later ritual, of the [[रथकार|Rathakāra]] as a caste below the [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]], but superior to the [[शूद्र|Śūdra]], ''cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 12, 13, and ''cf.'' [[वर्ण|Varṇa]], see also Fick, ''Die sociale Gliederung,'' 209, 210.</ref> regards the [[रथकार|Rathakāra]] as the offspring of a Māhiṣya (the son of a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] husband and a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] wife) and a Karaṇī (the daughter of a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] husband and a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] wife), but it is unreasonable to suppose that such an origin is historically accurate. The Rathakāras must rather be deemed to have been a functional caste. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx5_ve2_754> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 152, 153.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 196 ''et seq.''</ref> suggests that the '''Anu''' tribe formed the basis of the [[रथकार|Rathakāra]] caste, referring to their worship of the Ṛbhus, who are, of course, the chariotmakers ''par excellence.'' But there is little ground for this view.

रथ-गृत्स
<u>'''Ratha-gṛtsa'''</u> in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā (xv. 15) and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 48, 9) denotes a ‘skilled charioteer.’<ref name=fx1_ve2_755> ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 4, 3, 1;<br> kṛtsna, Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 8, 10;<br> kṛtsa, [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 9.</ref>

रथ-चक्र
<u>'''Ratha-cakra,'''</u> ‘chariot wheel,’ is often mentioned in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_756> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 43, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 6, 8;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 3, 3, 12;<br> v. 1, 5, 2;<br> xi. 8, 1, 11, etc.</ref> See '''[[रथ|Ratha]]''' and '''[[चक्र|Cakra]].'''

रथ-चर्षण
<u>'''Ratha-carṣaṇa'''</u> occurs once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_757> viii. 5, 19.</ref> where the sense is doubtful. Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_757> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> thought that some part of the chariot was meant, but the sense is perhaps only the ‘pathway of the chariot.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_757> ''Cf.'' also the citation and explanation in Durga's commentary on the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 12.</ref>

रथ-जूति
<u>'''Ratha-jūti'''</u> in the Atharvaveda (xix. 44, 3) is either an adjective meaning ‘driving swiftly in a chariot,’<ref name=fx1_ve2_758> ‘Of chariot-swiftness’ according to Whitney, Translation of the Athar vaveda, 967. ''Cf.'' his note on the passage.</ref> or a proper name, as Roth in the St. Petersburg Dictionary suggests. 

रथ-नाभि
<u>'''Ratha-nābhi,'''</u> the ‘nave of the chariot-wheel,’ is mentioned in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_759> xxxiv. 5.</ref> and in the Upaniṣads.<ref name=fx2_ve2_759> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 5, 5;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 4;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 8;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]. vii. 15, 1, etc.</ref>

रथ-प्रोत दार्भ्य
<u>'''Ratha-prota Dārbhya'''</u> (‘descendant of Darbha’) is mentioned in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (ii. 1, 3) perhaps as a king, but possibly as a priest.<br>==Foot Notes==

रथ-प्रोष्ठ
<u>'''Ratha-proṣṭha'''</u> occurs as the name of a princely family in the Rigveda (x. 60, 5). See '''[[सुबन्धु|Subandhu]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

रथ-मुख
<u>'''Ratha-mukha'''</u> in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_762> Av. viii. 8, 23;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 3, 2;<br> v. 4, 9, 3, etc.</ref> denotes the fore-part of a chariot. ''Cf.'' '''[[रथशीर्ष|Rathaśīrṣa]].'''

रथर्वी
<u>'''Ratharvī'''</u> is the name of a snake in the Atharvaveda (x. 4, 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

रथ-वाहन
<u>'''Ratha-vāhana'''</u> is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_764> vi. 75, 8.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_764> Av. iii. 17, 3 = [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 5, 5 = [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvi. 11 = Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 7, 12 = [[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 34. 35. See also [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxi. 10;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 9, 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 3, 23 ''et seq.''</ref> for a movable stand to hold the chariot. According to Roth,<ref name=fx3_ve2_764> ''Festgruss an Bo7htlingk,'' 95 ''et seq.;<br>'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 116.</ref> it corresponds to the Greek , on which the chariot rested when out of use. The word [[रथवाहन|Rathavāhana]]-[[वाह|vāha]] is employed in the sense of the two horses that draw the stand.<ref name=fx4_ve2_764> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 20, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 4, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 9;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 1.</ref> Weber<ref name=fx5_ve2_764> ''Über den [[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]],'' 27, n. 2, followed by Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 275. Weber, however, admits that the [[रथवाहन|Rathavāhana]] may at times have served as a mere stand, like the Homeric  while Geldner expresses the opinion that it never has that sense. The use of the term Rathavāhanavāha shows that the stand was movable.</ref> thinks it was used to convey the war chariot to the scene of action. 

रथवीति दार्भ्य
<u>'''Rathavīti Dārbhya'''</u> (‘descendant of Darbha’) is mentioned once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_765> v. 61, 17. 19.</ref> as residing in places abounding in kine (''gomatīr anu'') far away among the hills, possibly the Himālayas, and as the patron of the singer of the hymn. Later the tradition<ref name=fx2_ve2_765> See Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 50 ''et seq.,'' 62, n. 2, and the criticism in Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Neten,'' 1, 353, 354;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 359, 362.</ref> makes him the king, whose daughter '''Śyāsvāśva''' won for his wife by his father's and the Maruts' aid.

रथ-शीर्ष
<u>'''Ratha-śīrṣa,'''</u> the ‘head of the chariot’--that is, its fore-part-is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ix. 4. 1, 13).<br>==Foot Notes==

रथ-सङ्ग
<u>'''Ratha-saṅga'''</u> in the Rigveda (ix. 53, 2) denotes the hostile encounter of chariots.<br>==Foot Notes==

रथाक्ष
<u>'''Rathākṣa'''</u> in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_768> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 6, 4, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxix. 8.</ref> denotes the ‘axle of the chariot.’ Its length is given by the scholiast on the Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_768> viii. 8, 6.</ref> as 104 Aṅgulas (‘finger-breadths’), which agrees with the statement in the Āpastamba Śulba [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_768> vi. 5 (Bürk, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenläudischen Gesellschaft,'' 56, 344, 345).</ref> See '''[[रथ|Ratha]].'''

रथाह्न्य
<u>'''Rathāhnya'''</u> in the Śatapatha Brāhmana (xii. 2, 3, 12) denotes a ‘day's journey by chariot.’<br>==Foot Notes==

रथिन्
<u>'''Rathin'''</u> and '''Rathī''' in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_770> [[रथिन्|Rathin]], i. 122, 8;<br> v. 83, 3;<br> vi. 47, 31;<br> viii. 4, 9;<br> x. 40, 5;<br> 51, 6;<br> Rathī, i. 25, 3;<br> ii. 39, 2;<br> iii. 3, 6;<br> v. 87, 8;<br> vii. 39, 1, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_770> [[रथिन्|Rathin]], Av. iv. 34, 4;<br> vii. 62, 1;<br> 73, 1;<br> xi. 10, 24;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 2, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 26;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 7, 3, 7, etc.;<br> Rathī, [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 7, 15, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 296.</ref> denote ‘one who goes in a chariot,’ an expression which includes both the driver and the warrior who accompanied him. 

रथीतर
<u>'''Rathītara'''</u> (‘good charioteer’) is the name of a teacher mentioned in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_771> xxii. 11.</ref> and the Bṛhaddevatā.<ref name=fx2_ve2_771> i. 26;<br> iii. 40;<br> vii. 145 (ed. Macdonell).</ref>

रथे-ष्ठा
<u>'''Rathe-ṣṭhā,'''</u> ‘standing on the chariot,’ denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_772> i. 173, 4. 5;<br> ii. 17, 3;<br> vi. 21, 1;<br> 22, 5;<br> 29, 1;<br> viii. 4, 13;<br> 33, 14;<br> ix. 97, 49;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 32<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 296.</ref> the warrior who fights from the chariot, ‘car-fighter.’

रथोपस्थ
<u>'''Rathopastha,'''</u> ‘lap of the chariot,’ in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_773> viii. 8, 23.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_773> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 10, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 3, 3, 12, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 238, n.</ref> seems to denote the ‘bottom’ or lower part on which the driver and the fighter stand.

रन्ध्र
<u>'''Randhra'''</u> seems, in the phrase Ukṣṇo [[रन्ध्र|Randhra]] occurring in one passage of the Rigveda (viii. 7, 26), to be the name of a place, but the sense is very doubtful. In the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 9, 13) Ukṣṇo [[रन्ध्र|randhra]] is the name of a man.<br>==Foot Notes==

रभि
<u>'''Rabhi,'''</u> occurring once in the Rigveda (viii. 5, 29), designates some part of the chariot. The term perhaps means ‘supporting shaft.’<br>==Foot Notes==

रम्भ
<u>'''Rambha'''</u> seems to mean a ‘staff’ or ‘support’ in one passage of the Rigveda (viii. 45, 20). In another place (ii. 15, 9) a man is described as Rambhin, apparently as carrying a staff to support himself in old age; Sāyaṇa explains this word as ‘door-keeper’ (like one of the senses of ''daṇḍin,'' ‘staff-bearer,’ in later Sanskrit).<br>==Foot Notes==

रम्भिणी
<u>'''Rambhiṇī'''</u> occurs in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_777> i. 168, 3. ''Cf.'' i. 167, 3, and see Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 283.</ref> as being on the shoulders of the Maruts. A ‘spear’ seems to be meant, perhaps conceived as clinging (''rambh = rabk,'' ‘clasp’) to the shoulders of a man. 

रयि
<u>'''Rayi'''</u> is the common word for ‘wealth’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_778> i. 73, 1;<br> 159, 4;<br> ii. 21, 6;<br> iii. 1, 19;<br> iv. 2, 7;<br> 34, 10;<br> 36, 9;<br> vi. 6, 7;<br> 31, 1, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_778> Av. iii. 14, 1;<br> vi. 33, 3;<br> vii. 80, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 72;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ix. 22;<br> xiv. 22;<br> xxvii. 6, etc.</ref> Special mention is often made of wealth in ‘heroes’ ''([[वीर|vīra]])--i.e.,'' in ‘good sons,’<ref name=fx3_ve2_778> Rv. ii. 11. 13;<br> 30, 11;<br> iv. 51, 10, etc.</ref> in horses,<ref name=fx4_ve2_778> Rv. v. 41, 5;<br> viii. 6, 9, etc.</ref> in cattle,<ref name=fx5_ve2_778> Rv. v. 4, 11, etc.</ref> etc.

रशना
<u>'''Raśanā'''</u> means generally ‘cord’ or ‘rope.’ In the Rigveda the word ofter refers to various fastenings of a horse. In one passage<ref name=fx1_ve2_779> i. 162, 8. ''Cf.'' '''[[रज्जु|Rajju]].'''</ref> the expression ''śīrṣaṇyā [[रशना|raśanā]],'' ‘head rope,’ perhaps means not so much ‘reins’ as ‘headstall.’ In others<ref name=fx2_ve2_779> Rv. i. 163, 2. 5;<br> x. 79, 7.</ref> the sense of ‘traces’ seems certain, though sometimes<ref name=fx3_ve2_779> Rv. iv. 1. 9;<br> ix. 87, 1;<br> x. 18, 14. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 4, 3.</ref> ‘reins’ or ‘traces’ may equally well be intended. Elsewhere the more general sense of ‘rope’ for stening is meant.<ref name=fx4_ve2_779> Rv. ii. 28, 5;<br> Av. viii. 78, 1;<br> x. 9, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxi. 46;<br> xxii. 2;<br> xxviii. 33;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 6. 4, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 6, 3. 10, etc. ''Cf.'' the use of [[रशना|Raśanā]] as equivalent to ‘finger’ in Rv. x. 4, 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 249.</ref>

रश्मि
<u>'''1. Raśmi'''</u> is not rarely found in the sense of ‘rope’<ref name=fx1_ve2_780> Rv. i. 28, 4;<br> iv. 22, 8;<br> viii. 25, 18, etc.;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 19, 3, etc.</ref> generally; but more usually it denotes either the ‘reins’ or the ‘traces’<ref name=fx2_ve2_780> Rv. viii. 7, 8;<br> x. 130, 7, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 4, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 14;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 4, 2, etc. In [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 37, 1, the two inner (''antarau'') reins or traces of the chariot are mentioned.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 249.</ref> of a chariot, either sense being equally good in most passages.

रश्मि
<u>'''2. Raśmi'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_781> i. 35, 7;<br> iv. 52, 7;<br> vii. 36, 1;<br> 77, 3, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_781> Av. ii. 32, 1;<br> xii. 1, 15;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 1, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 2, 3, 14, etc.</ref> regularly denotes a ‘ray’ of the sun. 

रसा
<u>'''Rasā'''</u> is found in three passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_782> i. 112, 12;<br> v. 53, 9;<br> x. 75, 6. In v. 53, 9, the phrase ''rasānitabhā'' is found. Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 202, is inclined to regard ''[[अनितभा|anitabhā]]'' as an epithet of [[रसा|Rasā]], perhaps for ''amitabhā,'' ‘of unmeasured splendour,’ but this is hardly probable. It seems better to take [[अनितभा|Anitabhā]] as the name of an otherwise unknown river. ''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''India,'' 166, 173, n.</ref> clearly as the name of a real stream in the extreme north-west of the Vedic territory. Elsewhere<ref name=fx2_ve2_782> Rv. v. 41, 15;<br> ix. 41, 6;<br> x. 100, 1, 2 (''cf.'' Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 348;<br> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 100 ''et seq.'');<br> 121, 4.</ref> it is the name of a mythic stream at the ends of the earth, which as well as the atinosphere it encompasses. It is reasonable to assume that, as in the case of the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]],''' the literal is the older sense, and to see in the river a genuine stream, perhaps originally the Araxes or Jaxartes, because the Vendidad mentions the Raṅhā, the Avestan form of [[रसा|Rasā]]. But the word seems originally to allude merely to the ‘sap’ or ‘flavour’ of the waters,<ref name=fx3_ve2_782> Rv. iv. 43, 6;<br> viii. 72, 13.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 15, 16;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 323;<br> Brunnhofer, ''Iran und Turan,'' 86;<br> Weber, Proceedings of the Berlin Academy, 1898, 567-569.</ref> and so could be applied to every river, like [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]].

रसाशिर्
<u>'''Rasāśir'''</u> as an epithet of Soma in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_783> iii. 48, 1, where Sāyaṇa explains ''rasa'' as ‘milk.’ ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 211, n. 5.</ref> means ‘mixed with juice’--''i.e.,'' with milk.

रह-सू
<u>'''Raha-sū,'''</u> ‘bearing in secret,’ is a term applied in one passage of the Rigveda (ii. 29, 1) to an unmarried mother. ''Cf.'' '''Pati''' and '''[[धर्म|Dharma]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

रहस्यु देव-मलिम्लुच्
<u>'''Rahasyu Deva-malimluc'''</u> is the name, in the Pañcavimśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiv. 4, 7), of a mythical person who at '''[[मुनिमरण|Munimaraṇa]]''' slew the saintly '''Vaikhānases.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

रहू-गण
<u>'''Rahū-gaṇa'''</u> is the name of a family mentioned in the plural in one passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_786> i. 78, 5.</ref> According to Ludwig,<ref name=fx2_ve2_786> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 110. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen, Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 236, n. 1.</ref> they were connected with the '''Gotamas,''' as is shown by the name '''[[गोतम|Gotama]] [[राहूगण|Rāhūgaṇa]].''' 

राका
<u>'''Rākā'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_787> ii. 32, 4;<br> v. 42, 12.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_787> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 8, 1;<br> iii. 4, 9, 1. 6;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 8;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 37, 2, 6;<br> 47, 4, etc.;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 13, 1. etc.</ref> denotes the full moon day as a personification. ''Cf.'' '''Candramās.'''

राज-कर्तृ
<u>'''Rāja-kartṛ,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_788> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 17, 5.</ref> or '''Rāja-kṛt,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_788> Av. iii. 5, 7;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 1, 7;<br> xiii. 2, 2, 18.</ref> ‘king-maker,’ is the term applied in the Atharvaveda and the Brāhmaṇas to those who, ‘not themselves kings,’<ref name=fx3_ve2_788> ''Loc. cit.''</ref> aid in the consecration of the king. In the Śatapatha<ref name=fx2_ve2_788/> the persons meant and specified are the '''[[सूत|Sūta]],''' ‘charioteer,’ and the '''Grāmaṇī,''' ‘village chief,’ probably a representative chief from the village nearest to the place of consecration, as Eggeling<ref name=fx4_ve2_788> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 60, n.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 199 ''et seq.''</ref> suggests. In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_788/> according to the commentator's explanation, the father, brother, etc., are meant; in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_788/> also, the meaning of the expression is not stated in the text.

राज-कुल
<u>'''Rāja-kula,'''</u> a ‘kingly family,’ is mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 28, 4), where, it is to be noted, such a family is ranked after, not before, a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] Kula, a ‘Brahmin family.’<br>==Foot Notes==

राजन्
<u>'''1. Rājan,'''</u> ‘king,’ is a term repeatedly occurring in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_790> iii. 43, 5;<br> v. 54, 7, etc.</ref> and the later literature.<ref name=fx2_ve2_790> Av. iv. 22, 3. 5;<br> viii. 7, 16, etc.</ref> It is quite clear that the normal, though not universal form of government, in early India was that by kings, as might be expected in view of the fact that the Āryan Indians were invaders in a hostile territory: a situation which, as in the case of the Āryan invaders of Greece and of the German invaders of England, resulted almost necessarily in strengthening the monarchic element of the constitution.<ref name=fx3_ve2_790> ''Cf.'' Stubbs, ''Constitutional History of England,'' 59 ''et seq.''</ref> The mere patriarchal organization of society is not sufficient, as Zimmer<ref name=fx4_ve2_790> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 162.</ref> assumes, to explain the Vedic kingship. <br><br>''Tenure of Monarchy.''--Zimmer<ref name=fx5_ve2_790> ''Op. cit.,'' 162 ''et seq.'' So Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 188;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 336.</ref> is of opinion that while the Vedic monarchy was sometimes hereditary, as is indeed shown by several cases where the descent can be traced,<ref name=fx6_ve2_790> ''E.g.,'' '''[[वध्र्य्अश्व|Vadhryaśva]], Divodāsa, [[पिजवन|Pijavana]], [[सुदास्|Sudās]];<br>''' or '''[[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]], [[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]], [[मित्रातिथि|Mitrātithi]], Kuruśravaṇa [[उपमश्रवस्|Upamaśravas]],''' etc.;<br> Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 386. So a ‘kingdom of ten generations’ ('''[[दशपुरुषंराज्य|Daśapuruṣaṃrājya]]''') is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 9, 3, 3;<br> and ''cf.'' v. 4, 2, 8;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 12. 17.</ref> yet in others the monarchy was elective, though it is not clear whether the selection by the people was between the members of the royal family only or extended to members of all the noble clans. It must, however, be admitted that the evidence for the elective monarchy is not strong. As Geldner<ref name=fx7_ve2_790> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 303.</ref> argues, all the passages cited<ref name=fx8_ve2_790> Rv. x. 124, 8;<br> 173;<br> Av. i. 9;<br> iii. 4;<br> iv. 22.</ref> can be regarded not as choice by the cantons ('''[[विश्|Viś]]'''), but as acceptance by the subjects (''[[विश्|viś]]''): this seems the more probable sense. Of course this is no proof that the monarchy was not sometimes elective: the practice of selecting one member of the family to the exclusion of another less well qualified is exemplified by the legend in [[यास्क|Yāska]]<ref name=fx9_ve2_790> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 10.</ref> of the Kuru brothers, '''Devāpi''' and '''Śantanu,''' the value of which, as evidence of contemporary views, is not seriously affected by the legend itself being of dubious character and validity.<br><br>Royal power was clearly insecure: there are several references to kings being expelled from their realms, and their efforts to recover their sovereignty,<ref name=fx10_ve2_790> The technical term is ''apa-ruddha. Cf.'' Av. iii. 3, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxviii. 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 1;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 12, 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 9, 3, 3, etc.;<br> [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 30;<br> Caland, ''Altindisches Zauberritual,'' 37 ''et seq.''</ref> and the Atharvaveda contains spells in the interest of royalty.<ref name=fx11_ve2_790> Especially iii. 3. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 111 ''et seq.''</ref><br><br>''The King in War.''--Naturally the Vedic texts, after the Rigveda, contain few notices of the warlike adventures that no doubt formed a very considerable proportion of the royal functions. But the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx12_ve2_790> i. 8, 4, 1.</ref> contains the statement that the '''Kuru-[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]]''' kings, who, like the Brahmins of  those tribes, stand as representatives of good form, used to make their raids in the dewy season. The word '''[[उद्आज|Udāja]],''' too, with its variant Nirāja, records that kings took a share of the booty of war. The Rigveda<ref name=fx13_ve2_790> ''E.g.,'' the '''[[दाशराज्ञ|Dāśarājña]],''' Rv. vii. 18. 33, 83, and ''cf.'' Rv. iii. 33, 53.</ref> has many references to Vedic wars: it is clear that the Kṣatriyas were at least as intent on fulfilling their duty of war as the Brahmins on sacrificing and their other functions. Moreover, beside offensive war, defence was a chief duty of the king: he is emphatically the ‘protector of the tribe’ (''[[गोपा|gopā]] janasya''), or, as is said in the '''[[राजसूय|Rājasūya]]''' (‘royal consecration’), ‘protector of the Brahmin.’<ref name=fx14_ve2_790> Rv. iii. 43, 5. References to attacks on aborigines are common in the Rigveda--''e.g.,'' ii. 12, 11;<br> iv. 26, 3;<br> vi. 26, 5;<br> 33, 4, etc. For later references to war, ''cf.'' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ix. 17;<br> x. 3;<br> xxviii. 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 4, 8, 3;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 4, 2 ''et seq.;<br>'' and Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 187, 215. In the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]] the protection of the Brahmin is compensated with the ‘eating’ of the [[विश्|Viś]], the latter interesting the king more than the older duty of protection. See [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 12. 17.</ref> His '''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]]''' was expected to use his spells and charms to secure the success of his king's arms. The king no doubt fought in person: so '''[[प्रतर्दन|Pratardana]]''' met death in war according to the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]];<ref name=fx15_ve2_790> iii. 1.</ref> and in the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]] the king is invoked as ‘sacker of cities’ (''purāṃ bhettā'').<br><br>''The King in Peace.''--In return for his warlike services the king received the obedience<ref name=fx16_ve2_790> See, ''e.g.,'' '''Janaka's''' offer of the '''Videhas''' as slaves to '''[[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]],''' Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 4, 30, and see ''ibid.,'' ii. 1, 20;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 6, 10, etc.;<br> Rv. i. 67, 1;<br> iv. 50, 8.</ref> --sometimes forced<ref name=fx17_ve2_790> Rv. ix. 7, 5. ''Cf.'' vii. 6, 5, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 18, 2.</ref> --of the people, and in particular their contributions for the maintenance of royalty. The king is regularly<ref name=fx18_ve2_790> See '''Bali,''' and ''cf.'' Rv. i. 65, 4;<br> Av. iv. 22, 7;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 29;<br> viii. 12. 17;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 12;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 2, 17;<br> iv. 2, 1, 3, 17;<br> v. 3, 3, 12;<br> 4, 2, 3;<br> x. 6, 2, 1;<br> xiii. 2, 9, 6, 8, etc.;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 93, n.;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 246;<br> Pischel and Geldner, ''Vedische Stadien,'' 1, xvi;<br> Winternitz, ''Geschichte der indischen Litteratur,'' 1, 173, 174;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 161. It is to this form of taxation that the share of village (''grāme''), horses (''aśveṣu''), and kine (''goṣu'') of Av. iv. 22, 2, is to be referred. It is significant that the village and cattle are put on the same footing, as tending to refute the argument that the king was supreme landowner. See n. 31 below. For the rate of taxation, which later was one sixth, ''cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 85, 86;<br> ''India, Old and New,'' 238 ''et seq.;<br>'' 333;<br> Mrs. Rhys Davids, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1901, 860.</ref> regarded as ‘devouring  the people,’ but this phrase must not be explained as meaning that he necessarily oppressed them. It obviously has its origin in a custom by which the king and his retinue were fed by the people's contributions, a plan with many parallels. It is also probable that the king could assign the royal right of maintenance to a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]], thus developing a nobility supported by the people. Taxation would not normally fall on [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] or Brahmin; the texts contam emphatic assertions of the exemption of the goods of the latter from the royal bounty.<ref name=fx19_ve2_790> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 6, 2, 18;<br> 7, 1, 13. See also '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]''' (above, 2, 83) for the claim of the Brahmins to serve only king Soma, not the temporal king.</ref>In the people, however, lay the strength of the king.<ref name=fx20_ve2_790> ''Cf., e.g.,'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 8;<br> iii. 11, 8;<br> iv. 4, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 4, 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 5.</ref> See also '''Bali.'''<br><br>In return the king performed the duties of judge. Himself immune from punishment (''a-daṇḍya''), he wields the rod of punishment ('''[[दण्ड|Daṇḍa]]''').<ref name=fx21_ve2_790> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 4, 7.</ref> It is probable that criminal justice remained largely in his actual administration, for the Sūtras<ref name=fx22_ve2_790> ''E.g.,'' [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 43 ''et seq.''</ref> preserve clear traces of the personal exercise of royal criminal jurisdiction. Possibly the jurisdiction could be exercised by a royal officer, or even by a delegate, for a [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] is mentioned as an overseer (''adhyakṣa'') of the punishment of a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx23_ve2_790> xxvii. 4. ''Cf.'' '''[[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]],''' n. 18.</ref> In civil justice it may be that the king played a much less prominent part, save as a court of final appeal, but evidence is lacking on this head. The '''[[मध्यमशी|Madhyamaśī]]''' of the Rigveda was probably not a royal, but a private judge or arbitrator. A wide criminal jurisdiction is, however, to some extent supported<ref name=fx24_ve2_790> ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 25, 13;<br> iv. 4, 3;<br> vi. 67, 5;<br> vii. 61, 3;<br> 87, 3;<br> x. 10, 8 (= Av. xviii. 1, 9);<br> Av. iv. 16, 4.</ref> by the frequent mention of Varuṇa's spies, for Varuṇa is the divine counterpart of the human king.<ref name=fx25_ve2_790> See Foy, ''Die kōnigliche Gewalt,'' 80 ''et seq.''</ref> Possibly such spies could be used in war also.<ref name=fx26_ve2_790> ''Cf.'' Rv. viii. 47, 11;<br> Foy, ''op. cit.,'' 84. The reference is not certain.</ref><br><br>There is no reference in early Vedic literature to the exercise of legislative activitv by the king, though later it is an essential  part of his duties.<ref name=fx27_ve2_790> See Foy, ''op. cit.,'' chap. iii.</ref> Nor can we say exactly what executive functions devolved on the king.<br><br>In all his acts the king was regularly advised by his '''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]];''' he also had the advantage of the advice of the royal ministers and attendants (see '''[[रत्निन्|Ratnin]]'''). The local administration was entrusted to the '''Grāmaṇī,''' or village chief, who may have been selected or appointed by the king. The outward signs of the king's rank were his palace<ref name=fx28_ve2_790> ''Cf.'' Varuṇa's palace, Rv. ii. 41, 5;<br> vii. 88, 5. The throne, '''[[आसन्दी|Āsandī]],''' is used to form the name of '''Janamejaya's''' royal city, Asandīvant. ''Cf.'' also Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 4, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 12, 3-5.</ref> and his brilliant dress.<ref name=fx29_ve2_790> See, ''e.g.,'' Rv. i. 85, 8;<br> viii. 5, 38;<br> x. 78, 1, etc. So the king is the great lord of riches (''[[धन|dhana]]-patir dhanānām''), Av. iv. 22, 3, and in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 31, he is likened to the '''[[न्यग्रोध|Nyagrodha]]''' tree.</ref><br><br>''The King as Landowner.''--The position of the king with regard to the land is somewhat obscure. The Greek notices,<ref name=fx30_ve2_790> See Diodorus, ii. 40;<br> Arrian, ''Indica,'' 11;<br> Strabo, p. 703, and Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 87 ''et seq.''</ref> in which, unhappily, it would be dangerous to put much trust, since they were collected by observers who were probably little used to accurate investigations of such matters, and whose statements were based on inadequate information, vary in their statements. In part they speak of rent being paid, and declare that only the king and no private person could own land, while in part they refer to the taxation of land. Hopkins<ref name=fx31_ve2_790> ''India, Old and New,'' 221 ''et seq.''</ref> is strongly of opinion that the payments made were paid for protection-''i.e.,'' in modern terminology as a tax, but that the king was recognized as the owner of all the land, while yet the individual or the joint family also owned the land. As against BadenPowell,<ref name=fx32_ve2_790> ''Village Communities in India,'' 145;<br> ''Indian Village Community,'' 207 ''et seq.''</ref> who asserted that the idea of the king as a landowner was later, he urges for the Vedic period that the king, as we have seen, is described as devouring the people, and that, according to the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx33_ve2_790> vii. 29, 3.</ref> the '''[[वैश्य|Vaiśya]]''' can be devoured at will and maltreated (but, unlike the '''[[शूद्र|Śūdra]],''' not killed); and for the period of the legal Sūtras and Śāstras he cites [[बृहस्पति|Bṛhaspati]] and [[नारद|Nārada]] as clearly recognizing the king's overlordship, besides a passage of the [[मानव|Mānava]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] Śāstra<ref name=fx34_ve2_790> viii. 39.</ref> which describes the king as ‘lord of all,’ a phrase which  Bühler<ref name=fx35_ve2_790> In his note on Manu, ''loc. cit., Sacred Books of the East,'' 25, 259.</ref> was inclined to interpret as a proof of landowning. The evidence is, however, inadequate to prove what is sought. It is not denied that gradually the king came to be vaguely conceived--as the English king still is--as lord of all the land in a proprietorial sense, but it is far more probable that such an idea was only a gradual development than that it was primitive. The power of devouring the people is a political power, not a right of ownership; precisely the same feature can be traced in South Africa,<ref name=fx36_ve2_790> See Keith, ''Journal of the African Society,'' 6, 202 ''et seq.'' The evidence, so far as it goes, of other Āryan peoples does not support the theory of original kingly ownership. Such ownership did not exist, as far as can be seen, in Anglo-Saxon times (''English Historical Review,'' viii. 1-7). nor in Homeric Greece (Lang, ''Homer and His Age,'' 236 ''et seq.''), nor at Rome.</ref> where the chief can deprive a man arbitrarily of his land, though the land is really owned by the native. The matter is ultimately to some extent one of terminology, but the parallel cases are in favour of distinguishing between the political rights of the crown, which can be transferred by way of a grant, and the rights of ownership. Hopkins<ref name=fx37_ve2_790> ''Loc. cit.''</ref> thinks that the gifts of land to priests, which seems to be the first sign of land transactions in the Brāhmaṇas, was an actual gift of land; it may have been so in many cases, but it may easily also have been the grant of a superiority: the Epic grants are hardly decisive one way or the other.<br><br>For the relations of the king with the assembly, see '''[[सभा|Sabhā]];''' for his consecration, see '''[[राजसूय|Rājasūya]].''' A-rāja-tā, ‘lack of a king,’ means ‘anarchy.’<ref name=fx38_ve2_790> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 9, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 14, 6;<br> Lévi, ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 74.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 162 ''et seq.;<br>'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 84 ''et seq.;<br>'' Foy, ''Die ko7nigliche Gewalt nach den Dharmasūtren'' (Leipzig, 1895);<br> Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 46 ''et seq.;<br> Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1901, 860, 861.</ref>

राजन्
<u>'''2. Rājan'''</u> in several passages-means no more than a ‘noble of the ruling house,’ or perhaps even merely a ‘noble,’ there being(**  1 ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 40, 8; 108, 7; x. 42, 10; 97, 6; [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 6, 8, 3; v. 7, 6, 4; [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xl. 13; Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 48; xxvi. 2; Av. xix. 62, 1, and possibly ii. 6, 4, etc.; Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 236, 237. Possibly ''rājñaḥ'' in Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 5, may be taken in this sense. The king there is said to be a non-Āryan, but the reading is corrupt, and Oertel's conjecture is not probable. ''Cf.'' '''[[राज्य|Rājya]],''' n. 2.  no decisive passage. Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve2_791> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 176, 177.</ref> sees traces in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_791> x. 97, 6. He also compares Av. i. 9;<br> iii. 4;<br> iv. 22, where the king is referred to as superior to the other royal personages.</ref> that in times of peace there was no king in some states, the members of the royal family holding equal rights. He compares this with the state of affairs in early Germany.<ref name=fx4_ve2_791> The case of the Cherusci and Arminius' attempt to make himself king, which his relatives, the royal family, foiled (see Tacitus, ''Annals,'' ii. 88).</ref> But the passage merely shows that the nobles could be called [[राजन्|Rājan]], and is not decisive for the sense ascribed to it by Zimmer. Of course this state of affairs is perfectly possible, and is exemplified later in Buddhist times.<ref name=fx5_ve2_791> ''Cf.'' Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 19.</ref>

राजनि
<u>'''Rājani,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Rajana,'''’ is the patronymic of '''[[उग्रदेव|Ugradeva]]''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiv. 3, 17; xxiii. 16, 11) and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka (v. 4. 12).<br>==Foot Notes==

राजन्य
<u>'''Rājanya'''</u> is the regular term in Vedic literature<ref name=fx1_ve2_793> Only once in the Rv. in the late [[पुरुष|Puruṣa]]-[[सूक्त|sūkta]], x. 90, 12;<br> but often in the Av.: v. 17, 9;<br> 18, 2;<br> vi. 38, 4;<br> x. 10, 18;<br> xii. 4, 32 ''et seq.;<br>'' xv. 8, 1;<br> xix. 32, 8;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 13, 1;<br> 5, 4, 4;<br> 10, 1;<br> v. 1, 10, 3, etc. Even in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], where, on the whole, the later use of [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] prevails, the [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] is often mentioned. See Eggeling's index, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 561.</ref> for a man of the royal family, probably including also those who were not actually members of that family, but were nobles, though it may have been originally restricted to members of the royal family. This, however, does not appear clearly from any passage; the term may originally have applied to all the nobles irrespective of kingly power. In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_793> ''Cf.'' xiii. 4, 2, 17, with xiii. 1, 6, 2.</ref> the [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] is different from the [[राजपुत्र|Rājaputra]], who is literally a son of the king. The functions and place of the [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] are described under '''[[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]],''' which expression later normally takes the place of [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] as a designation for the ruling class. His high place is shown by the fact that in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve2_793> ii. 5, 4, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 258 ''et seq.;<br>'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 191. It is quite likely that the noble families not related to the royal family were families of minor princes whose rule was merged in that of the king on the formation of a powerful tribe, as was the case in Germany.</ref> he is ranked with the learned Brahmin and the  '''Grāmaṇī''' (who was a '''[[वैश्य|Vaiśya]]''') as having reached the height of prosperity (''gata-[[श्री|śrī]]'').

राजन्य-बन्धु
<u>'''Rājanya-bandhu'''</u> denotes a [[राजन्य|Rājanya]], but usually with a depreciating sense. Thus in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_794> xi. 6, 2, 5.</ref> '''[[जनक|Janaka]]''' is called by the Brahmins, whom he defeated in disputation, ‘a fellow of a Rājanya’; the same description is applied to '''[[प्रवाहण जैवलि|Pravāhaṇa Jaivali]]''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_794> vi. 1, 5.</ref> for a similar reason. On the other hand, in one passage<ref name=fx3_ve2_794> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 5, 2. 10, where ''cf.'' Eggeling's note, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 43, 370, n. 1. A similar case is apparently i. 2, 4, 2, where any special contempt cannot be meant.</ref> where reference is made to men eating apart from women, princes are said to do so most of all: the term [[राजन्यबन्धु|Rājanyabandhu]] cannot here be deemed to be contemptuous, unless, indeed, it is the expression of Brahmin contempt for princes, such as clearly appears in the treatment of '''[[नग्नजित्|Nagnajit]]''' in another passage.<ref name=fx4_ve2_794> viii. 1, 4, 10. ''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 515.</ref> Again, in a passage<ref name=fx5_ve2_794> i. 1, 4, 12.</ref> in which the four castes are mentioned, the '''[[वैश्य|Vaiśya]]''' precedes the [[राजन्यबन्धु|Rājanyabandhu]], a curious inversion of the order of the second and third castes.<ref name=fx6_ve2_794> Eggeling, ''op. cit.,'' 12, 28.</ref>

राजन्य-र्षि
<u>'''Rājanya-rṣi,'''</u> ‘royal sage,’ is a term applied to '''[[सिन्धुक्षित्|Sindhukṣit]]''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_795> xii. 12, 6. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 235, n. 3, and see '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]]''' (p. 261).</ref> The story about him is, however, purely mythical.

राज-पति
<u>'''Rāja-pati,'''</u> ‘lord of kings,’ is found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xi. 4, 3, 9) as an epithet of Soma. It is not used elsewhere as a title of imperial temporal supremacy: see '''[[राज्य|Rājya]].''' <br>==Foot Notes==

राज-पितृ
<u>'''Rāja-pitṛ'''</u> is one of the titles given to the king in the rite of the '''[[राजसूय|Rājasūya]]''' (‘royal consecration’) according to the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 12, 5; 17, 5). It probably designates the king as ‘father of a king,’ and indicates the hereditary character of the monarchy. Possibly the later plan<ref name=fx1_ve2_797> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 139. The sense of ‘having a king as father’ is also possible.</ref> of associating the king's son in the monarchy prevailed in earlier times also.

राज-पुत्र
<u>'''Rāja-putra,'''</u> ‘king's son,’ ‘prince,’ seems to be capable of being interpreted literally in every passage of the older literature<ref name=fx1_ve2_798> Rv. x. 40, 3;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 17, 6 (of '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]],''' but probably in a mythical sense);<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xix. 1, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiv. 8;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 5, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 2, 5;<br> 5, 2, 5, etc.</ref> in which it is found, though it may also be capable of a wider interpretation.<ref name=fx2_ve2_798> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxviii. 1, may be cited as identifying the '''[[राजन्य|Rājanya]]''' and the [[राजपुत्र|Rājaputra]].</ref> Later the [[राजपुत्र|Rājaputra]] degenerates into a mere ‘landowner.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_798> Jolly, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 50, 514, who points out that in the Rājataraṅgiṇī, vii. 360, traces of the older position of the [[राजपुत्र|Rājaputra]] are seen.</ref>

राज-पुरुष
<u>'''Rāja-puruṣa'''</u> denotes a ‘royal servant’ in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (ii. 3). ''Cf.'' '''[[पूरुष|Pūruṣa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

राज-भ्रातृ
<u>'''Rāja-bhrātṛ,'''</u> the ‘brother of the king,’ is mentioned as one of the eight '''Vīras,''' or supporters of the monarchy, in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_800> xix. 1, 4. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 30, n. 2.</ref> He is also alluded to elsewhere.<ref name=fx2_ve2_800> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 13, 18, etc.</ref>

राज-मात्र
<u>'''Rāja-mātra'''</u> is found in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xxvii. 6) and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xvii. 5, 3. 4; 15, 3), where it seems to include ‘the whole class of persons (who could be called) Rājan’--''i.e.,'' the '''Rājaputras''' and the '''Rājanyas.''' <br>==Foot Notes==

राज-यक्ष्म
<u>'''Rāja-yakṣma,'''</u> ‘royal sickness,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_802> i. 161, 1.</ref> and several times later on.<ref name=fx2_ve2_802> Av. xi. 3, 39;<br> xii. 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 5, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 3;<br> xxvii. 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 7.</ref> Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve2_802> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 375 ''et seq.''</ref> identifies it with consumption: this identification seems certain, being supported by the later view of the disease.<ref name=fx4_ve2_802> ''Cf.'' Wise, ''System of Hindu Medicine,'' 321 ''et seq.;<br>'' Jolly, ''Medicin,'' 88, 89, n. 2, who takes [[राजयक्ष्म|Rājayakṣma]] as denoting the worst of diseases, not the disease cured by the king. ''Cf.'' '''[[राजाश्व|Rājāśva]].'''</ref> Bloomfield<ref name=fx5_ve2_802> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 697. But contrast ''ibid.,'' 415.</ref> suggests ‘king's evil,’ or syphilis, as the sense, but this is not probable.

राज-सूय
<u>'''Rāja-sūya'''</u> is the name in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_803> iv. 8, 1;<br> xi. 7, 7.</ref> and the later literature<ref name=fx2_ve2_803> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 6, 2, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 15, 8;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, 1, 12, etc.</ref> of the ceremony of the ‘royal consecration.’ The rite is described at great length in the Sūtras,<ref name=fx3_ve2_803> See Weber, ''Über die Ko7nigsweihe, den [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]];<br>'' Hillebrandt, ''Rituallitteratur,'' 144-147;<br> Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 472, 491. The relation of the '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]]''' episode formed part of the ritual. That this points to human sacrifice having once formed part of the ritual of the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]] as supposed by Hillebrandt, ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Weber, 47;<br> and Oldenberg, 366, n. 1, seems very doubtful. ''Cf.'' Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1907, 844, 845.</ref> but its main features are clearly outlined in the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx4_ve2_803> Especially Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2, 3, 1 ''et seq.'' See also Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 1, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> while the verses used in the ceremony are preserved in the Saṃhitās of the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx5_ve2_803> See [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x.</ref> Besides much mere priestly elaboration, the ritual contains traces of popular ceremonial. For example, the king is clothed in the ceremonial garments of his rank, and provided with bow and arrow as emblems of sovereignty. He is formally anointed; he performs a mimic cow raid against a relative of his;<ref name=fx6_ve2_803> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 3, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> or engages in a sham fight with a '''[[राजन्य|Rājanya]].'''<ref name=fx7_ve2_803> ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 15 with commentary;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 100, n. 1.</ref> A game of dice is played in which he is made to be the victim;<ref name=fx8_ve2_803> See 2. '''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]]''' (p. 3)</ref> he symbolically ascends the quarters of the sky as an indication of his universal rule; and steps on a tiger skin, thus gaining the strength and the pre-eminence of the tiger. <br><br>A list of the consecrated kings is given in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx9_ve2_803> viii. 21-23. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 8.</ref> where the royal inauguration is called the ‘great unction’ (''[[महाभिषेक|mahābhiṣeka]]'') connected with Indra. It corresponds generally with a list of Aśvamedhins, ‘performers of the horse sacrifice,’ given in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx10_ve2_803> xiii. 5, 4.</ref> and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx11_ve2_803> xvi. 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, xxiv, xxv.</ref>

राज-स्तम्बायन
<u>'''Rāja-stambāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Rājastamba,’ is the patronymic of '''Yajñavacas''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_804> x. 4, 2, 1 (oxytone), 6, 5, 9 (proparoxytone). No stress need be laid on the accents of the Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].</ref>

राजाधिराज
<u>'''Rājādhirāja,'''</u> ‘king of kings,’ later a title of paramount sovereignty, is only found in Vedic literature in the late [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka (i. 31, 6) as a divine epithet.<br>==Foot Notes==

राजाश्व
<u>'''Rājāśva'''</u> (‘king's horse’) in the Atharvaveda (vi. 102, 2) seems merely to denote a powerful horse.<br>==Foot Notes==

राज्ञी
<u>'''Rājñī,'''</u> ‘queen,’ is found in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_807> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 6, 2;<br> 4, 2, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 8, 3, 9;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 3, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiv. 13;<br> xv. 10.</ref> and in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_807> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 6, 2;<br> iii. 11, 3, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 23, 2, etc.</ref>

राज्य
<u>'''Rājya'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_808> iii. 4, 2;<br> iv. 8, 1;<br> xi. 6, 15;<br> xii. 3, 31;<br> xviii. 4, 31.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_808> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 3, 4;<br> 6, 6, 5;<br> vii. 5, 8, 3, etc.;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 23, etc.;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 5, as emended by Roth, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, ccxliii.</ref> regularly denotes ‘sovereign power,’ from which, as the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_808> v. 1, 1, 12.</ref> notes, the Brahmin is excluded.<br><br>In addition to [[राज्य|Rājya]], the texts give other expressions of sovereign power. Thus the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_808> v. 1, 1, 3.</ref> contends  that the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]] sacrifice is that of a king, the '''[[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]]''' that of a [[सम्राज्|Samrāj]] or emperor, the status of the latter ([[साम्राज्य|Sāmrājya]]) being superior to that of the former ([[राज्य|Rājya]]). The sitting on a throne ('''[[आसन्दी|Āsandī]]''') is given in the same text<ref name=fx5_ve2_808> xii. 8, 3, 4.</ref> as one of the characteristics of the [[सम्राज्|Samrāj]]. Elsewhere<ref name=fx6_ve2_808> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiv. 5;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 11, 5. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 2, 2.</ref> [[स्वाराज्य|Svārājya]], ‘uncontrolled dominion,’ is opposed to [[राज्य|Rājya]]. In the ritual of the '''[[राजसूय|Rājasūya]]''' the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx7_ve2_808> viii. 12, 4. 5. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvii. 16, 3.</ref> gives a whole series of terms: [[राज्य|Rājya]], [[साम्राज्य|Sāmrājya]], [[भौज्य|Bhaujya]], [[स्वाराज्य|Svārājya]], [[वैराज्य|Vairājya]], Pārameṣṭhya, and [[माहाराज्य|Māhārājya]], while Ādhipatya, ‘supreme power,’ is found elsewhere.<ref name=fx8_ve2_808> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xv. 3, 35;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 2, 6.</ref> But there is no reason to believe that these terms refer to essentially different forms of authority. A king might be called a '''[[महाराज|Mahārāja]]''' or a '''[[सम्राज्|Samrāj]],''' without really being an overlord of kings; he would be so termed if he were an important sovereign, or by his own entourage out of compliment, as was '''[[जनक|Janaka]]''' of '''[[विदेह|Videha]].'''<ref name=fx9_ve2_808> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 3, 1, 2. 6;<br> 2, 2, 3, etc.</ref> That a really great monarchy of the Aśoka or [[गुप्त|Gupta]] type ever existed in the Vedic period seems highly improbable.<ref name=fx10_ve2_808> ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 30.</ref>

रात्री
<u>'''Rātrī'''</u> is the most usual word in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_809> i. 35, 1;<br> 94, 7;<br> 113, 1, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_809> Av. i. 16, 1;<br> v. 5, 1, etc.</ref> for ‘night.’ ''Cf.'' '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''

राथीतर
<u>'''Rāthītara,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[रथीतर|Rathītara]],’ is the patronymic of '''[[सत्यवचस्|Satyavacas]]''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (i. 9, 1), and occurs several times as the name of a teacher in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (vii. 4, etc.).<br>==Foot Notes==

राथीतरी-पुत्र
<u>'''Rāthītarī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of [[रथीतर|Rathītara]],’ is the name of a teacher in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], the pupil of '''[[भालुकी-पुत्र|Bhālukī-putra]],''' according to the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension (vi. 5, 1), of the '''Krauñcikīputras''' according to the Mādhyaṃdina (vi. 4, 32). <br>==Foot Notes==

राध गौतम
<u>'''Rādha Gautama'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[गोतम|Gotama]]'''’) is the name of two teachers in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_812> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373, 384.</ref>

राधेय
<u>'''Rādheya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Rādhā,’ is the metronymic of a teacher in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka (vii. 6).<br><br>''Cf.'' Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 372.<br>==Foot Notes==

राम
<u>'''1. Rāma'''</u> is the name of a man in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_814> x. 93, 14.</ref> Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve2_814> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 166.</ref> thinks that he bore the patronymic '''[[मायव|Māyava]],'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_814> Rv. x. 93, 15.</ref> but this is doubtful.

राम औप-तस्विनि
<u>'''2. Rāma Aupa-tasvini'''</u> (‘descendant of Upatasvina’) is the name of a teacher in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iv. 6, 1, 7).<br>==Foot Notes==

राम क्रातु-जातेय
<u>'''3. Rāma Krātu-jāteya'''</u> (‘descendant of Kratu-jāta’) '''[[वैयाघ्र-पद्य|Vaiyāghra-padya]]''' (‘descendant of Vyāghrapad’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[शङ्ग शाट्यायनि|Śaṅga Śāṭyāyani]] [[आत्रेय|Ātreya]],''' who is mentioned in two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 40, 1; iv. 16, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

राम मार्ग-वेय
<u>'''4. Rāma Mārga-veya'''</u> is the name of a man of the priestly family of the '''Śyāparṇas''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_817> vii. 27, 3. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 43, 345, n.;<br> '''Muir''' ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 438.</ref>

रामकायन
<u>'''Rāmakāyana.'''</u> See '''[[बस्त|Basta]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

रामा
<u>'''Rāmā'''</u> in a few passages<ref name=fx1_ve2_819> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 6, 8, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 8, 13;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxii. 7. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 74, 84.</ref> seems to have the sense of a ‘hetaera.’

रायो-वाज
<u>'''Rāyo-vāja'''</u> is the name of a seer of Sāmans or chants in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 1, 4; xiii. 4, 17; ''cf.'' xxiv. 1, 7). <br>==Foot Notes==

राष्ट्र
<u>'''Rāṣṭra'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_821> iv. 42, 1;<br> vii. 34, 11;<br> 84, 2;<br> x. 109, 3;<br> 124, 4, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_821> Av. x. 3, 12;<br> xii. 1, 8;<br> xiii. 1, 35;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ix. 23;<br> xx. 8;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 10, 3;<br> iii. 5, 7, 3;<br> v. 7, 4, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 1, 13, etc.;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 3, 7;<br> 7, 4;<br> 8, 6;<br> iv. 6, 3.</ref> denotes ‘kingdom’ or ‘royal territory.’

राष्ट्र-गोप
<u>'''Rāṣṭra-gopa,'''</u> ‘protector of the realm,’ is the epithet applied, in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 25), to the '''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]],''' whose special charge it was to preserve the king and realm from harm by his spells and rites.<br>==Foot Notes==

रासभ
<u>'''Rāsabha'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_823> i. 34, 9;<br> 116, 2;<br> 162, 21;<br> iii. 53, 5;<br> viii. 85, 7.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_823> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, 5, 7;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xviii. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 1, 1 11;<br> 3, 1, 23;<br> 2, 3;<br> 4, 4, 3, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 233;<br> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 149, who suggests ‘mule’ as a possible sense in Rv. iii. 53, 5.</ref> denotes an ‘ass.’

रास्ना
<u>'''Rāsnā'''</u> in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_824> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, i. 30;<br> xi. 59;<br> xxxviii. 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 1, 2, 2;<br> iv. 1, 5, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, i. 2;<br> xvi. 5;<br> xix. 6, etc.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] denotes ‘girdle’ or ‘band,’ like '''[[रशना|Raśanā]]''' and '''[[रश्मि|Raśmi]].'''<br><br>vi. 2, 2, 25; 5, 2, 11, 13. ''Cf. rāsnāva,'' ‘girdled,’ iv. 1, 5, 19.

राहु
<u>'''Rāhu,'''</u> the demon that eclipses the sun, seems to be referred to in one passage of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_825> xix. 9, 10. ''Cf.'' [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 100;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 87;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 914.</ref> The reading here is somewhat uncertain, but [[राहु|Rāhu]] is probably meant.

राहू-गण
<u>'''Rāhū-gaṇa,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[रहू-गण|Rahū-gaṇa]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''[[गोतम|Gotama]]''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_826> 1. 4, 1, 10. 18;<br> xi. 4, 3, 20. ''Cf.'' also Sāyaṇa on Rv. i. 81, 3;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 151, 152;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 2, 8.</ref> 

रिक्थ
<u>'''Riktha'''</u> is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_827> iii. 31, 2, on which ''cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 5;<br> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Kommentar,'' 49, 50;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 239 ''et seq.''</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_827> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 18, 9 (of '''Śunaḥśepa's''' double inheritance, which, according to that text, is the learning of the '''Gāthins''' and the sovereignty of the '''Jahnus;<br>''' but see Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 16, who thinks the real succession was to the two houses, the '''[[आङ्गिरस|Āṅgirasa]]''' and the '''[[कुशिक|Kuśika]]''').</ref> denoting ‘inheritance.’<ref name=fx1_ve2_827/>

रिपु
<u>'''Ripu'''</u> is a common word for ‘foe,’ ‘enemy,’ in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_828> i. 36, 16;<br> 147, 3;<br> 148, 5;<br> ii. 23, 16;<br> 27, 16;<br> 34, 9, etc.</ref> It occurs in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_828> xix. 49, 9.</ref> also.

रुक्म
<u>'''Rukma'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_829> i. 166, 10;<br> iv. 10, 5;<br> v. 53, 4;<br> 56, 1, etc. So ''[[रुक्म|rukma]]-vakṣas,'' ‘wearing golden ornaments on the breast,’ ii. 34, 2. 8;<br> v. 55, 1;<br> 57, 5, etc.;<br> ''rukmin,'' i. 66, 6;<br> ix. 15, 5. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 2, 3;<br> v. 1, 10, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 40, etc.</ref> denotes an ornament, probably of gold, usually worn on the breast. Being in several passages used of the sun, it probably had the form of a disk. In the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_829> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 1, 20;<br> v. 2, 1, 21;<br> 4, 1, 13;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 2, 3;<br> 9, 1, etc. So ''rukmin'' in Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 21, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 260, 263;<br> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 160, who suggests as a possible sense ‘gold coin’;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the;<br> East,'' 32, 112, 299.</ref> it designates a gold plate. See also '''[[रजत|Rajata]].'''

रुक्म-पाश
<u>'''Rukma-pāśa'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_830> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 7, 1, 7. 27;<br> 3, 8;<br> vii. 2, 1, 15, etc.</ref> denotes the ‘cord’ on which ‘the gold plate’ is hung.

रुद्र-ब्नुति द्राह्यायण
<u>'''Rudra-bnuti Drāhyāyaṇa'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''Trāta''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_831> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref>

रुम
<u>'''Ruma'''</u> is mentioned in one hymn of the Rigveda (viii. 4, 2) with '''[[रुशम|Ruśama]], [[श्यावक|Śyāvaka]],''' and '''[[कृप|Kṛpa]]''' as a favourite of Indra. <br>==Foot Notes==

रुरु
<u>'''Ruru'''</u> is one of the victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_833> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 19, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 27. 39;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14. 9.</ref> A kind of deer is meant. The Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_833> vi. 75, 15.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 83.</ref> mentions ‘deer-headed’ (''ruru-śīrṣan'') arrows, meaning such as have points made of deer's horn.

रुशम
<u>'''Ruśama'''</u> is mentioned three times in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_834> viii. 3, 13;<br> 4, 2;<br> 51, 9.</ref> as a protégé of Indra. The Ruśamas occur in another passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_834> v. 30, 12-15.</ref> with their generous king '''[[ऋणंचय|Ṛṇaṃcaya]];''' they are also referred to, with their king '''[[कौरम|Kaurama]],''' in a passage of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx3_ve2_834> xx. 127, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 129;<br> Ludwig. Translation of the Rigveda. 3, 154;<br> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 409;<br> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 214;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 690.</ref>

रुशमा
<u>'''Ruśamā'''</u> is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xxv. 13, 3), where she is said to have run round '''[[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]],''' and so to have defeated Indra, who understood her challenge to refer to the earth proper. The story indicates the connexion of the Ruśamas with the '''Kurus.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

रुषती
<u>'''Ruṣatī'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_836> i. 117, 8.</ref> denotes, according to Ludwig,<ref name=fx2_ve2_836> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 150.</ref> a maiden who was married to '''[[श्याव|Śyāva]].''' On the other hand, Roth<ref name=fx3_ve2_836> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. ruśant.''</ref> treats the word as ''ruśatī,'' ‘white,’ and ''ruśatīm'' seems clearly to be the reading of the text. It is doubtful what the meaning is, and whether [[श्याव|Śyāva]] is a proper name at all.<ref name=fx4_ve2_836> ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 110, who suggests that Kṣoṇa may be a man's name.</ref>

रेक्णस्
<u>'''Rekṇas'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_837> i. 31, 14;<br> 121, 5;<br> 158, 1;<br> 162, 2;<br> vi. 20, 7;<br> vii. 4, 7;<br> 40, 2, etc.</ref> denotes ‘inherited property,’ and then ‘property’ in general. 

रेणु
<u>'''Reṇu'''</u> is the name of a son of '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 17, 7) and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xv. 26, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

रेभ
<u>'''1. Rebha'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_839> i. 127, 10;<br> vi. 3, 6;<br> 11, 3;<br> vii. 63, 3;<br> viii. 97, 11;<br> ix. 7, 6, etc. ''Cf.'' Av. xx. 127, 4.</ref> denotes a ‘singer’ of praise, a ‘panegyrist.’

रेभ
<u>'''2. Rebha'''</u> occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_840> i. 112, 5;<br> 116, 24;<br> 117, 4;<br> 118, 6;<br> 119, 6;<br> x. 39, 9.</ref> as the name of a protégé of the Aśvins, who saved him from the waters and from imprisonment.<ref name=fx1_ve2_840/>

रेवा
<u>'''Revā,'''</u> a name of the Narmadā (Nerbudda) river, otherwise occurring only in post-Vedic literature, is seen by Weber<ref name=fx1_ve2_841> ''Indian Literature,'' 123 (‘a native of the country south of the Revā’). ''Cf. Indian Antiquary,'' 30, 273, n. 17.</ref> in the word '''[[रेवोत्तरस्|Revottaras]],''' which is found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_841> xii. 8, 1, 17;<br> 9, 3, 1.</ref> and is certainly a man's name.

रेवती
<u>'''Revatī.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

रेवोत्तरस्
<u>'''Revottaras'''</u> is the name of '''[[पाटव|Pāṭava]] [[चाक्र|Cākra]] [[स्थपति|Sthapati]],'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_843> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 9, 3, 1 ''et seq. Cf.'' xii. 8, 1, 17.</ref> who was expelled, with '''[[दुष्टरीतु|Duṣṭarītu]] [[पौंसायन|Pauṃsāyana]],''' by the '''Sṛnjayas,''' and who was in part instrumental in the restoration of his master to power, despite the opposition of '''[[बल्हिक प्रातिपीय|Balhika Prātipīya]],''' the '''Kuru''' king.

रेष्मन्
<u>'''Reṣman'''</u> in the Atharvaveda (vi. 102, 2; xv. 2, 1), the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (iii. 15, 2), and the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā (xxv. 2) denotes a ‘whirlwind.’<br>==Foot Notes==

रैक्व
<u>'''Raikva'''</u> is the name of a man who is mentioned several times in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iv. 1, 3. 5. 8; 2, 2. 4). <br>==Foot Notes==

रैक्व-पर्ण
<u>'''Raikva-parṇa,'''</u> masc. plur., is the name of a locality in the '''[[महावृष|Mahāvṛṣa]]''' country according to the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_846> iv. 2, 5. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 130.</ref>

रैभी
<u>'''Raibhī,'''</u> fem. plur., occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_847> x. 85, 6.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve2_847> vii. 5, 11, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]], [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], v. 2.</ref> together with '''[[गाथा|Gāthā]]''' and '''[[नाराशंसी|Nārāśaṃsī]],''' as a form of literature. Later on<ref name=fx3_ve2_847> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 32, 1;<br> Kanṣītaki [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxx. 5, etc.</ref> the [[रैभी|Raibhī]] verses are identified with certain verses of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx4_ve2_847> xx. 127, 4-6 = [[खिल|Khila]], v. 9.</ref> but that this identification holds<ref name=fx5_ve2_847> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 689.</ref> in the Rigveda and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā seems very doubtful.<ref name=fx6_ve2_847> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 238.</ref>

रैभ्य
<u>'''Raibhya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[रेभ|Rebha]],'''’ is the name of a teacher in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) in the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (ii. 5, 20; iv. 5, 26), where he is said to be a pupil of '''[[पौतिमाष्यायण|Pautimāṣyāyaṇa]]''' and '''[[कौण्डिन्यायन|Kauṇḍinyāyana]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

रोग
<u>'''Roga'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_849> i. 2, 4;<br> ii. 3, 3;<br> iii. 28, 5;<br> vi. 44, 1;<br> 120, 3;<br> of the head (''[[शीर्षण्य|śīrṣaṇya]]''), ix. 8. 1. 21 ''et seq.''</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_849> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vii. 26, 2.</ref> denotes ‘disease’ generally.

रोपणाका
<u>'''Ropaṇākā'''</u> is the name of a bird mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_850> i. 50, 12.</ref> and the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_850> i. 22, 4. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7, 6, 22.</ref> The ‘thrush’ seems to be meant;<ref name=fx3_ve2_850> ''Śārikā,'' Sāyaṇa on Rv., ''loc. cit.'' On Av. i. 22, 4, he explains it as ''kāṣṭhaśuka,'' perhaps a kind of parrot.</ref> but Keśava, the commentator on the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx4_ve2_850> xxvi. 20.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 92;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 266;<br> Caland, ''Altindisches Zauberritual,'' 76, n. 13;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 23.</ref> is inclined to understand the word to mean a sort of wood. 

रोमशा
<u>'''Romaśā'''</u> is mentioned in the Bṛhaddevatā<ref name=fx1_ve2_851> iii. 156 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes.</ref> as the wife of king '''[[भावयव्य|Bhāvayavya]],''' and is credited with the authorship of a Rigvedic verse.<ref name=fx2_ve2_851> i. 126, 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 128.</ref> But in reality the word ''[[रोमशा|romaśā]]'' in that verse, which is the source of the legend, is merely an adjective meaning ‘hairy.’

रोहिणी
<u>'''1. Rohiṇī'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_852> viii. 93, 13;<br> 101, 13 (reading ''rohiṇyāḥ'' with Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'').</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_852> Av. xiii. 1, 22;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 6, 2;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 2, 6;<br> iv. 5, 8, 2, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘red cow.’

रोहिणी
<u>'''2. Rohiṇī.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

रोहित्
<u>'''Rohit'''</u> in some passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_854> i. 14, 12;<br> 100, 16;<br> v. 56, 5;<br> vii. 42, 2.</ref> denotes, according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, a ‘red mare,’ while later<ref name=fx2_ve2_854> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 6, 5;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 11, 18;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 30. 37;<br> Av. iv. 4, 7;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 33, 1 (''cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 178, n.).<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 82.</ref> it denotes a ‘red doe.’

रोहित
<u>'''1. Rohita'''</u> denotes a ‘red horse’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_855> i. 94, 10;<br> 134, 9;<br> ii. 10, 2;<br> iii. 6, 6, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_855> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 4, 3;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 3, 12, etc. So [[रोहित|Rohita]] in Av. xiii. 1, 1 ''et seq.,'' represents the sun as a ‘red horse.’</ref>

रोहित
<u>'''2. Rohita'''</u> is a son of '''Hariścandra''' in the famous tale of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 14) and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xv. 18, 8).<br>==Foot Notes==

रोहितक
<u>'''Rohitaka'''</u> occurs in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (iii. 9, 3) with a variant [[रोहीतक|Rohītaka]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_857> So Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 5, 8.</ref> as the name of the tree ''Andersonia [[रोहितक|Rohitaka]].''

रोहितक-कूल
<u>'''Rohitaka-kūla'''</u> is in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_858> xiv. 3, 12. ''Cf.'' xv. 11, 6;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vi. 11, 4.</ref> the name of a locality after which a Sāman or chant was called. 

रोहीतक
<u>'''Rohītaka.'''</u> See '''[[रोहितक|Rohitaka]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

रौहिण
<u>'''1. Rauhiṇa'''</u> is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_860> i. 103, 2;<br> ii. 12, 12.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_860> xx. 128, 13.</ref> as a demon foe of Indra's. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx3_ve2_860> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 207.</ref> is inclined to see in the word the name of a planet (''cf.'' '''[[रोहिणी|Rohiṇī]]'''), but without any clear reason.

रौहिण
<u>'''2. Rauhiṇa'''</u> (‘born under the [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] Rohiṇī’) '''[[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]]''' (‘descendant of '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]]'''’), is the name of a man in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka (i. 12, 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

रौहिणायन
<u>'''Rauhiṇāyana'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[रौहिण|Rauhiṇa]]'''’) is the patronymic of '''Priyavrata''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (x. 3, 5, 14). It is also in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) in the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (ii. 5, 20; iv. 5, 26) the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[शौनक|Śaunaka]]''' and others.<br>==Foot Notes==

लक्ष
<u>'''Lakṣa'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_863> ii. 12, 4. ''Cf.'' Lüders, ''Das Würfelspiel im alten Indien,'' 4, n. 1;<br> Zimmer. ''Altindisches Leben,'' 287.</ref> denotes the ‘prize’ at dicing.

लक्षण
<u>'''Lakṣaṇa'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_864> Gobhila [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 6, 5. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 10;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 35;<br> 13, 466.</ref> or '''[[लक्ष्मन्|Lakṣman]]'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_864> Av. vi. 141, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 9.</ref> denotes the ‘mark’ made on cattle by branding to distinguish ownership. According to the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx3_ve2_864> ''Loc. cit.''</ref> it was to be made under the '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] [[रेवती|Revatī]],''' clearly because of the property indicated in the name (‘wealthy’) of that [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]]. See '''[[अष्टकर्णी|Aṣṭakarṇī]].''' 

लक्ष्मण्य
<u>'''Lakṣmaṇya'''</u> in one verse of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_865> v. 33, 10. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 155.</ref> seems to be a patronymic of '''[[ध्वन्य|Dhvanya]],''' ‘son of Lakṣmaṇa.’

लक्ष्मन्
<u>'''Lakṣman.'''</u> See '''[[लक्षण|Lakṣaṇa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

लब
<u>'''Laba,'''</u> ‘quail’ (''Perdix chinensis'') is one of the victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_867> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 24. ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vii. 2, where Rv. x. 119 is called the Labasūkta;<br> the Anukramaṇī (Index), too, gives Aindra Laba as the author of that hymn. ''Cf.'' Bṛhaddevatā, viii. 40, with Macdonell's note. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 90.</ref>

लम्बन
<u>'''Lambana'''</u> is the reading in the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension (v. 10, 1) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] for '''[[आडम्बर|Āḍambara]],''' ‘drum,’ in the Mādhyaṃdina recension (v. 12, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

लवण
<u>'''Lavaṇa,'''</u> ‘salt,’ is never mentioned in the Rigveda, only once in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_869> vii. 76, 1.</ref> and not after that until the latest part of the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx2_ve2_869> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 17, 7 = Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 17, 3. ''Cf.'' also Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 13, 1;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 4, 12;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2, 1, 16;<br> and see Strabo, xv. 1, 30.</ref> where it is regarded as of extremely high value.<ref name=fx3_ve2_869> It seems to be placed above gold in value in Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 17, 7.</ref> This silence in the early period is somewhat surprising if the regions then occupied by the Indians were the Panjab and the Indus valley, where salt abounds; it would at first sight seem less curious if the home of the early Vedic Indian is taken to be '''[[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]].'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_869> ''Cf.'' Map 19 in the Atlas of the ''Imperial Gazetteer of India,'' vol. 26, and see Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 21 ''et seq.;<br> India, Old and New,'' 30 ''et seq.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 54, 55;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 318;<br> Geiger, ''Ostiranische Kultur,'' 419;<br> Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 150.</ref> It is, however, quite conceivable that a necessary commodity might happen to be passed over without literary mention in a region where it is very common, but to be referred to in a locality where it is not found, and consequently becomes highly prized. 

लवन
<u>'''Lavana'''</u> in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (ii. 2) denotes the ‘mowing’ or ‘reaping’ of corn.<br>==Foot Notes==

लाक्षा
<u>'''Lākṣā'''</u> occurs once in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_871> v. 5, 7. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 229;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 387, 421.</ref> as the name of a plant.

लाङ्गल
<u>'''Lāṅgala'''</u> is the regular word for ‘plough’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_872> iv. 57, 4.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_872> Av. ii. 8, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 6, 7, 4;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 26, etc.;<br> ''lāṅgaleṣā,'' Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxii. 4, 7.</ref> It is described in a series of passages<ref name=fx3_ve2_872> Av. iii. 17, 3 = [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 5, 6 = [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvi. 11 = Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 7, 12 = Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xii. 71 = [[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 34. 35.</ref> as ‘lancepointed’ (''pavīravat'' or ''pavīravam''), ‘well-lying’ (''susīmam''),<ref name=fx4_ve2_872> The texts have ''suśevam;<br>'' Roth conjectures ''susīmam.'' See Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 116.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 236.</ref> and ‘having a well-smoothed handle’ (see '''[[त्सरु|Tsaru]]'''). See also '''[[सीर|Sīra]].'''

लाङ्गलायन
<u>'''Lāṅgalāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[लाङ्गल|Lāṅgala]],’ is the patronymic of '''[[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] [[मौद्गल्य|Maudgalya]]''' (‘descendant of '''[[मुद्गल|Mudgala]]'''’) in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (v. 3, 8).<br>==Foot Notes==

लाज
<u>'''Lāja,'''</u> masc. plur., in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_874> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 2, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 13. 81;<br> xxi. 42, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_874> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 8, 2, 7. 10;<br> 9, 1, 2;<br> xiii. 2, 1, 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 269.</ref> denotes ‘fried or parched grain.’

लाजि
<u>'''Lāji'''</u> in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā (xxiii. 8) and the Taittīrīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 9, 4, 8) is a word of uncertain meaning; according to Sāyaṇa, it is a vocative of Lājin, ‘having parched grain’; according to Mahīdhara, it denotes a ‘quantity of parched grain.’ <br>==Foot Notes==

लातव्य
<u>'''Lātavya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Latu,’ is the patronymic of '''Kūśāmba [[स्वायव|Svāyava]]''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_876> viii. 6, 8. ''Cf.'' Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 7;<br> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 25 (a [[गोत्र|Gotra]] is there mentioned).</ref>

लामकायन
<u>'''Lāmakāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Lamaka,’ is often mentioned as an authority in the Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_877> iv. 9, 22;<br> vi. 9, 18, etc.;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 49.</ref> the [[निदान|Nidāna]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_877> iii. 12. 13;<br> vii. 4, 8, etc.;<br> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 1, 45.</ref> and the Drāhyāyaṇa Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]];<ref name=fx3_ve2_877> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 4, 384.</ref> also with the name '''Saṃvargajit''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_877> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373.</ref>

लाह्यायन
<u>'''Lāhyāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Lahya,’ is the patronymic of '''[[भुज्यु|Bhujyu]]''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iv. 5, 1. 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

लिबुजा
<u>'''Libujā'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_879> x. 10, 13.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_879> vi. 8, 1;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 13, 11;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 28;<br> xi. 34.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 70.</ref> denotes a creeping plant that climbs trees.

लुश
<u>'''Luśa'''</u> is represented in a series of passages in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_880> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 2, 22;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 128;<br> Śāṭyāyanaka in Oertel, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 31 ''et seq.''</ref> as a rival of '''[[कुत्स|Kutsa]]''' for the favour of Indra. To [[लुश|Luśa]] Dhānāka the authorship of certain hymns<ref name=fx2_ve2_880> x. 35. 36. ''Cf.'' Bṛhaddevatā, ii. 129;<br> iii. 55, with Macdonell's notes.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 291, n. 3;<br> Lévi, ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 37, 38.</ref> is ascribed by the Anukramaṇī (Index) of the Rigveda.

लुशाकपि खार्गलि
<u>'''Luśākapi Khārgali'''</u> (‘descendant of Khṛgala’) is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_881> xvii. 4, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 145, n. 3.</ref> as having cursed '''[[कुषीतक|Kuṣītaka]]''' and the '''Kauṣītakins.''' He was a contemporary of '''[[केशिन्|Keśin]] [[दाल्भ्य|Dālbhya]]''' according to the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve2_881> xxx. 2 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 471);<br> Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitā, xlvi. 5.</ref> 

लोक
<u>'''Loka'''</u> denotes ‘world’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_882> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 2, quotes no example of this meaning for the Rigveda, where he sees the word used only in the sense of ‘place,’ ‘room,’ ‘free or open space.’ But Rv. x. 14, 9, is a fairly certain example of the wider sense.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_882> Av. viii. 9, 1. 15;<br> iv. 38, 5;<br> xi. 5, 7;<br> 8, 10, etc.;<br> in ix. 5, 14, the worlds of heaven (''[[दिव्य|divya]]'') and of earth (''pārthiva'') are distinguished;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxii. 11 ''et seq.,'' etc.</ref> Mention is often made of the three worlds,<ref name=fx3_ve2_882> Av. x. 6, 31;<br> xii. 3, 20;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 8;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 1, 7, 3, etc.</ref> and ''ayaṃ lokaḥ,'' ‘this world,’<ref name=fx4_ve2_882> Av. v. 30, 17;<br> viii. 8, 8;<br> xii. 5, 38;<br> xix. 54, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 46, etc.</ref> is constantly opposed to ''asau lokaḥ,''<ref name=fx5_ve2_882> Av. xii. 5, 38. 57;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 5, 9, 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 28, 2;<br> viii. 2, 3, etc.</ref> ‘yonder world’-''i.e.,'' ‘heaven.’ Loka itself sometimes means ‘heaven,’<ref name=fx6_ve2_882> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 1, 7;<br> x. 5, 4, 16;<br> xi. 2, 7, 19;<br> and so probably [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 13, 12.</ref> while in other passages several different sorts of world are mentioned.<ref name=fx7_ve2_882> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxvi. 4;<br> Kauṣī taki [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xx. 1;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 6, 1;<br> iv. 3, 36 ''et seq.;<br>'' vi. 1, 18, etc.</ref>

लोध
<u>'''Lodha'''</u> occurs in a very obscure verse of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_883> iii. 53, 23.</ref> where Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_883> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> conjectures that some sort of ‘red’ animal is meant, and Oldenberg<ref name=fx3_ve2_883> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 255.<br><br>''Cf.'' the obscure ''adhī-[[लोध|lodha]]-karṇa'' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 6, 16, 1, perhaps meaning ‘having quite red ears.’ [[यास्क|Yāska]], [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iv. 12, equates the word with ''lubdha,'' ‘confused,’ but this does not suit the context. So also Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 84;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 160;<br> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]], Glossar,'' 151, who sees in the word the designation of a noble steed.</ref> shows some reason for thinking that a ‘red goat’ is intended.

लोपा
<u>'''Lopā'''</u> is mentioned in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve2_884> v. 5, 18, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 93.</ref> where Sāyaṇa explains it as a kind of bird, perhaps the carrion crow (''śmaśānaśakuni''). 

लोपा-मुद्रा
<u>'''Lopā-mudrā'''</u> appears in one hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_885> i. 179, 4.</ref> where she is seemingly the wife of '''[[अगस्त्य|Agastya]],''' whose embraces she solicits.<ref name=fx2_ve2_885> The story is differently told in the Bṛhaddevatā, iv. 57 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes. See also Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenldndischen Gesellschaft,'' 39, 68;<br> ''Go7ttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen,'' 1909, 76 ''et seq.;<br>'' Sieg. ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 120 ''et seq.;<br>'' Winternitz, ''Vienna Oriental Journal,'' 20, 2 ''et seq.;<br>'' von Schroeder, ''Mysterium und Mimus,'' 156 ''et seq.;<br>'' Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 204;<br> 1911, 997, n. 3.</ref>

लोपाश
<u>'''Lopāśa'''</u> is the name of an animal, probably the ‘jackal’ or ‘fox,’ which is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_886> x. 28, 4.</ref> and is included in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx2_ve2_886> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 21, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 17;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 36.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 84.</ref>

लोह
<u>'''Loha,'''</u> primarily an adjective meaning ‘red,’ is used as a neuter substantive to designate a metal, probably ‘copper,’ but possibly ‘bronze.’ It is mentioned in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_887> xviii. 13.</ref> and the Taittīriya Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve2_887> iv. 7, 5, 1.</ref> as distinguished from '''[[श्याम|Śyāma]].''' It also occurs several times in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx3_ve2_887> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 2, 2, 18;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 17, 7;<br> vi. 1, 5;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 4, where Oertel takes ‘copper’ to be meant in contrast with '''Ayas,''' which he renders ‘brass.’ The sense of ‘iron’ is nowhere needed.<br><br>''Cf.'' Vincent Smith, ''Indian Antiquary,'' 34, 230;<br> and on the early history of metals;<br> Mosso, ''Mediterranean Civilization,'' 57-62.</ref> See Ayas.

लोह-मणि
<u>'''Loha-maṇi'''</u> in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 2, 5) denotes a ‘copper amulet,’ as Bo7htlingk<ref name=fx1_ve2_888> ''Cf.'' Little, ''Grammatical Index,'' 134.</ref> renders it, rather than a ‘lump of gold,’ as translated by Max Müller following the scholiast.

लोहायस
<u>'''Lohāyasa,'''</u> ‘red metal,’ is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_889> v. 4, 1, 1. 2.</ref> where it is distinguished from '''Ayas''' and gold. In the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_889> iii. 17, 3.</ref> the contrast is with Kārṣṇā-  yasa, ‘iron,’ and in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_889> iii. 62, 6, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 90, n.;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 189.</ref> with [[कृष्णायस|Kṛṣṇāyasa]], ‘iron.’ ‘Copper’ seems to be meant.

लोहित
<u>'''Lohita,'''</u> often occurring as an adjective meaning ‘red,’ is used as a neuter substantive in the Atharvaveda (xi. 3, 7) to denote a metal, presumably ‘copper.’ As a proper name it is found in Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxiv. 9, 7.<br>==Foot Notes==

लोहितायस
<u>'''Lohitāyasa,'''</u> ‘red metal,’ ‘copper,’ is the variant of '''Loha''' in the Maitrāyaṇī (ii. 11, 5; iv. 4, 4) and [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] (xviii. 10) Saṃhitās.<br>==Foot Notes==

लोहिताहि
<u>'''Lohitāhi,'''</u> ‘red snake,’ is the name of a variety of serpent mentioned in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_892> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 14, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 12;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 31. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 95.</ref>

लौहित्य
<u>'''Lauhitya,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[लोहित|Lohita]],’ is the patronymic of a large number of teachers in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], which clearly must have been the special object of study of the [[लौहित्य|Lauhitya]] family. See '''Kṛṣṇadatta, Kṛṣṇarāta, Jayaka, Triveda Kṛṣṇarāta, Dakṣa [[जयन्त|Jayanta]], Palligupta, Mitrabhūti, Yaśasvin [[जयन्त|Jayanta]], Vipaścit [[दृढजयन्त|Dṛḍhajayanta]], [[वैपश्चित|Vaipaścita]] [[दार्ढजयन्ति|Dārḍhajayanti]], [[वैपश्चित|Vaipaścita]] [[दार्ढजयन्ति|Dārḍhajayanti]] [[दृढजयन्त|Dṛḍhajayanta]], Śyāmajayanta, Śyāmasujayanta, [[सत्यश्रवस्|Satyaśravas]].''' A [[लौहित्य|Lauhitya]] or Lauhikya is also mentioned as a teacher in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx1_ve2_893> vii. 22;<br> Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 50, n. 1.</ref> The form of name ([[जयन्त|Jayanta]]) affected by the family, and the silence of the older texts, proves that they were modern. 

वंश
<u>'''1. Vaṃśa,'''</u> denoting the ‘rafters’ or ‘beams’ of the house as made of bamboo cane, is found in this sense from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_894> i. 10, 1.</ref> onwards.<ref name=fx2_ve2_894> Av. iii. 12, 6;<br> ix. 3, 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 8, 10;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 3, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 1, 2, 25;<br> ''[[शाला|śālā]]-[[वंश|vaṃśa]],'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 1;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, viii. 1, where perhaps the main beam of the house is meant. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 71, 153;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 346.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[तिरश्चीनवंश|Tiraścīnavaṃśa]], [[प्राचीनवंश|Prācīnavaṃśa]],''' and see '''[[गृह|Gṛha]].'''

वंश
<u>'''2. Vaṃśa'''</u> (lit. ‘bamboo’) in the sense of ‘spiritual genealogy,’<ref name=fx1_ve2_895> From the analogy of the successive joints of the bamboo. ''Cf.'' ‘familytree.’</ref> ‘list of teachers,’ is found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_895> x. 6, 5, 9;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 3, 14.</ref> the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_895> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 374.</ref> and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx4_ve2_895> xv. 1.</ref>

वंश-नर्तिन्
<u>'''Vaṃśa-nartin'''</u> is mentioned as one of the victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_896> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 21;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 17, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 290.</ref> A ‘poledancer’ or ‘acrobat’ seems to be meant.

वंसग
<u>'''Vaṃsaga'''</u> is in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_897> i. 7, 8;<br> 55, 1;<br> 58, 4;<br> v. 36, 1, etc.;<br> Av. xviii. 3, 36.</ref> a common name of the ‘bull’ that leads the herds.

वक दाल्भ्य
<u>'''Vaka Dālbhya'''</u> (‘descendant of Dalbha’) is the name of a teacher in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_898> i. 2, 13;<br> 12, 1.</ref> According to the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve2_898> xxx. 2 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 471).</ref> he was engaged in a ritual dispute with '''[[धृतराष्ट्र|Dhṛtarāṣṭra]].'''

वकल
<u>'''Vakala'''</u> denotes in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_899> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7, 4, 2;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 2.</ref> the ‘inner bark’ of a tree, ‘bast.’ 

वक्षणा
<u>'''Vakṣaṇā,'''</u> fem. plur. denotes in one passage of the '''Rigveda'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_900> iii. 33, 12. ''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 175-181.</ref> the bed of a stream.

वघा
<u>'''Vaghā'''</u> is the name of a noxious animal the '''Atharvaveda.'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_901> vi. 50, 3;<br> ix. 2, 22. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98.</ref>

वङ्ग
<u>'''Vaṅga,'''</u> the designation of Bengal proper is not found in the earlier Vedic literature unless it is to be recognized in the curious word ''Vaṅgāvagadhāḥ,'' which occurs in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx1_ve2_902> ii. 1, 1. ''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 200;<br> ''[[मगध|Magadha]]-[[वङ्ग|Vaṅga]]-Matsyāḥ'' occurs in the Atharvaveda Pariśiṣṭas (i. 7, 7). but that is very late.</ref> and which suggests amendment to ''[[वङ्ग|Vaṅga]]-Magadhāḥ,'' ‘the Vaṅgas and the Magadhas,’ two neighbouring peoples. The name is certainly found in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_902> i. 1, 14. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 394, n.;<br> Calan ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 56, 553.</ref>

वङ्गृद
<u>'''Vaṅgṛda'''</u> is the name of a demon or a human foe in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_903> i. 53, 8. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 149.</ref>

वज्र
<u>'''Vajra'''</u> in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_904> vi. 24, 1.</ref> denotes, according to Geldner,<ref name=fx2_ve2_904> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 138.</ref> the ‘handle,’ while '''[[कूट|Kūṭa]]''' means the ‘head’ of the hammer.

वडव
<u>'''Vaḍava'''</u> is a common name for a ‘mare’ in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_905> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 1, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 6, 3;<br> iii. 8, 22, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 5, 2. 19, etc. A derivative of this word is the masculine [[वडव|Vaḍava]], [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 8, 3.</ref>

वणिज्
<u>'''Vaṇij'''</u> denotes ‘merchant’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_906> i. 112, 11;<br> v. 45, 6.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_906> Av. iii. 15, 1, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 257.</ref> See '''[[पणि|Paṇi]]''' and '''[[क्रय|Kraya]];''' ''cf.'' also '''[[वाणिज|Vāṇija]].''' 

वणिज्या
<u>'''Vaṇijyā'''</u> in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_907> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 4, 21;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 1, 2.</ref> denotes the business of a merchant ('''[[वणिज्|Vaṇij]]''') ‘trade.’

वत्स
<u>'''1. Vatsa'''</u> is often found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_908> iii. 33, 3;<br> iv. 18, 10, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_908> Av. iv. 18, 2;<br> xii. 4, 7 (wolves kill them);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 4, 11, 4 (the cow caresses the calf on birth), etc.</ref> in the sense of ‘calf.’ Reference is made to the use of a calf to induce the cow to give milk,<ref name=fx3_ve2_908> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 6, 2;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 13, 2.</ref> and to the separation of the cows from the calves at certain times.<ref name=fx4_ve2_908> Rv. v. 30, 10;<br> viii. 88, 1. See Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 11''c.''</ref>

वत्स
<u>'''2. Vatsa'''</u> occurs several times in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_909> viii. 6, 1;<br> 8, 8;<br> 9, 1;<br> 11, 7.</ref> as the name of a singer, a son or descendant of '''[[कण्व|Kaṇva]].''' In the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_909> xiv. 6, 6.</ref> he is said to have passed successfully through a fire ordeal to which he resorted for the purpose of proving to his rival, '''[[मेधातिथि|Medhātithi]],''' the purity of his descent. He is also mentioned in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_909> xvi. 11, 20. He also occurs in Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxiv. 5, 11.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 105;<br> Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 36-38.</ref> as the recipient of bounty from '''Tirindara [[पारशव्य|Pāraśavya]].'''

वत्सतर
<u>'''Vatsatara, Vatsatari,'''</u> denotes a ‘young calf’ in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_910> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 17, 1;<br> 18, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiv. 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 27, 2, etc.</ref>

वत्स-नपात् बाभ्रव
<u>'''Vatsa-[[नपात्|napāt]] Bābhrava'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[बभ्रु|Babhru]]'''’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[पथिन् सौभर|Pathin Saubhara]],''' in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_911> ii. 5, 22;<br> iv. 5, 28 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref>

वत्स-प्री भालन्दन
<u>'''Vatsa-prī Bhālandana'''</u> (‘descendant of Bhalandana’) is the name of a sage who ‘saw’ the Vātsapra Sāman (chant). He  is mentioned in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_912> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 1, 6;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xix. 12 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 470);<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 2.</ref> and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_912> xii. 11, 25. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 7, 4, 1.</ref>

वधक
<u>'''Vadhaka'''</u> is the name of some sort of ‘reed’ in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_913> viii. 8, 3.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_913> v. 4, 5, 14.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 72;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref>

वधर्
<u>'''Vadhar'''</u> means a ‘weapon’ generally; it is used not merely of a divine,<ref name=fx1_ve2_914> i. 32, 9, etc.</ref> but also of a human<ref name=fx2_ve2_914> Rv. iv. 22, 9;<br> viii. 22, 8;<br> 24, 27.<br><br>''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 221.</ref> weapon in the Rigveda.

वधू
<u>'''1. Vadhū'''</u> is a frequent word for ‘woman’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_915> v. 37, 3;<br> 47, 6;<br> vii. 69, 3;<br> viii. 26, 13;<br> x. 27, 12;<br> 85, 30;<br> 107, 9.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_915> Av. i. 14, 2;<br> iv. 20, 3;<br> x. 1, 1;<br> xiv. 2, 9, 41, etc.</ref> It denotes, according to Delbrück,<ref name=fx3_ve2_915> ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 414, 439.</ref> the woman as either married or as seeking a husband, or as a bride in the wedding ceremony. The word appears to be derived from a form of the root ''vah,'' ‘to carry,’ as is ''[[वहतु|vahatu]],'' ‘the bridal procession,’ thus meaning ‘she who is to be or has been conducted home.’ Zimmer,<ref name=fx4_ve2_915> ''Altindsiches Leben,'' 108.</ref> however, objects to this explanation, regarding ''[[वधू|vadhū]]'' as a derivative from a different root meaning ‘to marry.’

वधू
<u>'''2. Vadhū'''</u> is in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_916> viii. 19, 36. ''Cf.'' also v. 47, 6, as taken by Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 319.</ref> taken by Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_916> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 3.</ref> to denote a ‘female animal,’ while Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve2_916> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 108, 109.</ref> urges that it means a ‘female slave.’ As far as the use of [[वधू|Vadhū]] goes, either meaning is abnormal, for if [[वधू|Vadhū]] never elsewhere  means a female animal (from ''vah,'' to ‘draw’ a cart), neither does it denote a slave: as the passage refers to a gift of fifty Vadhūs by '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]] Paurukutsya''' to the singer, the latter must have been a polygamist of an advanced type to require fifty wives. The same doubt arises in the case of ''vadhūmant,'' which is used in the Rigveda and Atharvaveda as an epithet of the chariot ('''[[रथ|Ratha]]'''),<ref name=fx4_ve2_916> i. 126, 3;<br> vii. 18, 22.</ref> of horses ('''[[अश्व|Aśva]]'''),<ref name=fx5_ve2_916> viii. 68, 17. ''Cf.'' vi. 27, 8.</ref> and of buffaloes ('''Uṣṭra''').<ref name=fx6_ve2_916> Av. xx. 127, 2.</ref> Zimmer sees in all cases a reference to slaves in the chariots or with the horses: this interpretation has the support of the Bṛhaddevatā.<ref name=fx7_ve2_916> iii. 147 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes.</ref> Roth's version of the references to horses or buffaloes as ‘suitable for draught’ is not very happy; if ''[[वधू|vadhū]]'' is really a female animal ''vadhūmant'' means rather ‘together with mares,’ or ‘together with female buffaloes,’ which makes reasonable sense.<ref name=fx8_ve2_916> ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 197;<br> Pischel, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 35, 712 ''et seq.;<br>'' Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref>

वध्रिमती
<u>'''Vadhrimatī,'''</u> ‘having an impotent man as a husband,’ seems in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_917> i. 116, 13;<br> 117, 24;<br> vi. 62, 7;<br> x. 39, 7;<br> 65, 12.</ref> to be the name of a woman who owed the restoration of her husband's virility to the Aśvins, and obtained a son, '''[[हिरण्यहस्त|Hiraṇyahasta]].''' The word is, however, possibly only descriptive.

वध्र्य्-अश्व
<u>'''1. Vadhry-aśva,'''</u> ‘having castrated horses,’ is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_918> vi. 61, 1;<br> x. 69, 1 ''et seq.'' '''Sumitra,''' in the latter hymn, can hardly be a name of his.</ref> of a prince, the father of '''Divodāsa,''' and an energetic supporter of the fire cult, as was his son after him. He is mentioned in a long list of names in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_918> iv. 29, 4. ''Cf.'' Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxiv. 6, 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie.'' 1, 97.</ref>

वध्र्य्-अश्व आनूप
<u>'''2. Vadhry-[[अश्व|aśva]] Ānūpa'''</u> (‘descendant of Anūpa’) is the name of the seer of a Sāman, or chant, in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 3, 17). <br>==Foot Notes==

वन
<u>'''Vana'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_920> i. 54, 1;<br> 65, 8;<br> iii. 51, 5;<br> v. 41, 11, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_920> [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], lxxvi. 3, etc.</ref> denotes the ‘forest,’ not necessarily of trees only, but, like [[अरण्य|Araṇya]], the wild uninhabited land.<ref name=fx3_ve2_920> Rv. vii. 1, 19 (opposed to ''dama,'' ‘home’).</ref> It also means ‘wooden cup’ used in the Soma ritual,<ref name=fx4_ve2_920> Rv. i. 55, 4;<br> ii. 14, 9, etc. See Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 163, 166, 193.</ref> and in one passage perhaps a part of the chariot.<ref name=fx5_ve2_920> viii. 34, 18.</ref>

वन-प
<u>'''Vana-pa,'''</u> ‘forest-guardian,’ is included in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_921> Vājasaneyi Samhitā, xxx. 19;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 11, 1.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Dāvapa.'''

वनर्-गु
<u>'''Vanar-gu,'''</u> ‘forest-goer,’ is used in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_922> x. 4, 6.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_922> iv. 36, 7.</ref> to designate robbers who haunt the forests. In the [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_922> Āraṇya Saṃhitā, iv. 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> the term is more generally opposed to civilized men (''kavayaḥ,'' ‘sages’; ''vanargavaḥ,'' ‘savages’).

वनस्-पति
<u>'''Vanas-pati,'''</u> ‘lord of the forest,’ primarily denotes ‘tree,’<ref name=fx1_ve2_923> Rv. i. 166, 5;<br> iii. 34, 10;<br> v. 7, 4;<br> 41, 8, etc.;<br> Av. xi. 6, 1 (distinguished from '''[[वीरुध्|Vīrudh]]''' and '''Oradhi''');<br> 9, 24, etc.</ref> and then ‘post’ or ‘pole.’<ref name=fx2_ve2_923> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 8, 4;<br> Av. ix. 3, 11, etc.</ref> In some passages it is applied either to a part of the chariot or to the chariot as a whole.<ref name=fx3_ve2_923> Rv. ii. 37, 3;<br> iii. 53, 20;<br> vi. 47, 26;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 11. See Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 251.</ref> It also means a ‘wooden drum’<ref name=fx4_ve2_923> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ix. 12. ''Cf.'' Av. xii. 3, 15.</ref> and a ‘wooden amulet,’<ref name=fx5_ve2_923> Av. vi. 85, 1;<br> x. 3, 8. 11.</ref> while in some passages<ref name=fx6_ve2_923> Rv. i. 91, 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 23, etc.</ref> it denotes the plant ''par excellence,'' Soma.

वन्दन
<u>'''1. Vandana'''</u> is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_924> vii. 50, 2 ''Cf.'' 21, 5;<br> Av. vii. 113, 2;<br> ''[[तृष्ट|tṛṣṭa]]-vandanā,'' ‘having a rough eruption,’ vii. 113, 1;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 391;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 564, 565 Whitney. Translation of the Atharvaveda, 469.</ref> as the name of a disease, apparently some sort of eruption spreading over the body. 

वन्दन
<u>'''2. Vandana'''</u> is the name of a protégé of the Aśvins in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_925> i. 112, 5;<br> 116, 11;<br> 117, 5;<br> 118, 8;<br> x. 39, 8. ''Cf.'' Baunack, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 50, 263 ''et seq.;<br>'' Oldenberg, ''ṚgvedaNoten,'' 1, 109.</ref>

वन्धुर
<u>'''Vandhura'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_926> i. 139, 4;<br> iii. 14, 3;<br> vi. 47, 9, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_926> Av. x. 4, 2. The Aśvins' car is ''trivandhura,'' ‘having three seats,’ because the Aśvins are a pair, and the charioteer makes a third. ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 47, 2;<br> 118, 1. 2;<br> 157, 3;<br> 183, 1;<br> vii. 69, 2;<br> 71. 4;<br> viii. 22, 5;<br> and ''cf.'' ix. 62, 17. See Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' viii, 247;<br> Weber, Proceedings of the Berlin Academy, 1898, 564;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 241, n. 371.</ref> the ‘seat’ of the chariot. See '''[[रथ|Ratha]].'''

वप
<u>'''Vapa,'''</u> ‘sower,’ is mentioned in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_927> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 3, 1.</ref>

वपन
<u>'''Vapana'''</u> in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_928> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 7, 17, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 2, 1.</ref> denotes the process of ‘shaving.’ ''Cf.'' '''[[क्षुर|Kṣura]]''' and '''[[केश|Keśa]].'''

वपा
<u>'''Vapā'''</u> in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_929> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 2, 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 3, 4;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 3, 3, 5.</ref> denotes an ant-hill.

वप्तृ
<u>'''Vaptṛ'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_930> x. 142, 4.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_930> Av. viii. 2, 17;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 6, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 266;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 235, n. 4.</ref> denotes a ‘shaver,’ ‘barber.’

वप्र
<u>'''Vapra,'''</u> ‘rampart,’ is a conjectural reading in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_931> vii. 71, 1. See Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 435, 436.</ref> 

वम्र
<u>'''1. Vamra,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_932> Rv. i. 51, 9;<br> viii. 102, 21.</ref> '''Vamrī,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_932> Rv. iv. 19, 9 (where the son of an unmarried maiden is exposed to be eaten by ants);<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 1, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1, 1, 8. 14, etc. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 97.</ref> are the names of the male and female ‘ant’ in the Rigveda and later. ''Cf.'' '''[[वपा|Vapā]].'''

वम्र
<u>'''2. Vamra'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in the '''Rigveda.'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_933> i. 51, 9;<br> 112, 15;<br> x. 99, 5.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[वम्रक|Vamraka]].'''

वम्रक
<u>'''Vamraka'''</u> is mentioned in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_934> x. 99, 12.</ref> where Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_934> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> thinks that an ‘ant’ is meant. But Pischel,<ref name=fx3_ve2_934> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 238, 239.</ref> with more probability, thinks that it is a proper name, perhaps equivalent to '''[[वम्र|Vamra]],''' and denoting the child of a maiden who was saved from being devoured by ants.<ref name=fx4_ve2_934> Rv. iv. 19, 9;<br> 30, 16.</ref>

वयस्
<u>'''1. Vayas'''</u> is a common name for ‘bird’ in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_935> iii. 21, 2;<br> vi. 59, 1;<br> vii. 96, 1;<br> viii. 7, 24, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_935> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 1, 1;<br> v. 2, 5, 1;<br> 5, 3, 2. etc.</ref>

वयस्
<u>'''2. Vayas'''</u> denotes in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_936> xii. 3, 1.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_936> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 12, 5, 9;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 2, 21;<br> 3, 3, 3. etc.</ref> the ‘age of animals or men.’

वया
<u>'''Vayā'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_937> ii. 5, 4;<br> v. 1, 1;<br> vi. 7, 6;<br> 13, 1;<br> viii. 13, 6, 17, etc.</ref> denotes the ‘branch’ of a tree.

वयित्री
<u>'''Vayitrī'''</u> in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 8, 9) denotes a ‘female weaver.’ <br>==Foot Notes==

वय्य
<u>'''Vayya'''</u> occurs in several passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_939> i. 54, 6;<br> 112, 6 (where [[तुर्वीति|Turvīti]] does not occur);<br> ii. 13, 12;<br> iv. 19, 6.</ref> in connexion with '''[[तुर्वीति|Turvīti]],''' of whom the word is, according to Sāyaṇa,<ref name=fx2_ve2_939> On Rv. i. 54, 6.</ref> a patronymic in one passage. Roth<ref name=fx3_ve2_939> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' quoting ix. 68, 8, as a clear case.</ref> is inclined to think that the sense of ‘companion’ would suit all passages.

वर
<u>'''Vara'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_940> i. 83, 2;<br> v. 60, 4;<br> ix. 101, 14;<br> x. 85, 8. 9.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_940> Av. ii. 36, 1. 5. 6;<br> xi. 8, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 7, 1, etc.</ref> regularly denotes a ‘wooer.’

वरण
<u>'''Varaṇa'''</u> is the name of a tree (''Crataeva Roxburghii'') in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_941> vi. 85, 1;<br> x. 3, 1, etc.;<br> xix. 32, 9.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_941> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 9. 10;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 8, 4, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 60, 61;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 505.</ref>

वरणावती
<u>'''Varaṇāvatī'''</u> is found in one passage of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_942> iv. 7, 1.</ref> It seems to be, as Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_942> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> thought, the name of a stream, and is regarded by Ludwig<ref name=fx3_ve2_942> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 201.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 20.</ref> as the Ganges. Bloomfield,<ref name=fx4_ve2_942> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 376.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 26, 27;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 154.</ref> while considering that a plant may, as Sāyaṇa thinks, be meant, yet regards a reference to a river as probable. ''Cf.'' '''[[काशि|Kāśi]].'''

वरत्रा
<u>'''Varatrā'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_943> iv. 57, 4 (of the plough), etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_943> Av. xi. 3, 10;<br> xx. 135, 13.</ref> denotes a ‘thong’ or ‘strap.’ It was used to fasten the oxen to the yoke,<ref name=fx3_ve2_943> Rv. x. 60, 8;<br> 102, 8;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 13.</ref> or perhaps to fasten the yoke to the pole.<ref name=fx4_ve2_943> This suits x. 60, 8, rather more naturally, and is so taken by Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 248, 249.</ref> Or, again, it denotes<ref name=fx5_ve2_943> Rv. x. 106, 5;<br> Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 156.</ref> the strap which was used in drawing up water from the well ('''[[अवत|Avata]]'''). 

वरशिख
<u>'''Varaśikha'''</u> is the name of a leader whose tribe is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_944> vi. 27, 4. 5. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 156;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 105;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 133, who thinks that [[वरशिख|Varaśikha]] was the leader of the '''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]]-Vṛcīvants,''' but this is conjectural, and not very probable. ''Cf.'' '''[[पार्थव|Pārthava]].''' In the Bṛhaddevatā, v. 124 ''et seq.,'' the form of the name is Vāraśikha (‘descendant of Varaśikha’), occurring in the plural only.</ref> as being defeated by '''[[अभ्यावर्तिन् चायमान|Abhyāvartin Cāyamāna]]'''

वराह
<u>'''Varāha,'''</u> ‘boar,’ is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_945> i. 61, 7;<br> viii. 77, 10;<br> ix. 97, 7;<br> x. 28, 4 (''cf.'' '''[[क्रोष्टृ|Kroṣṭṛ]]'''), etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_945> Av. viii. 7, 23;<br> xii. 1, 48;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, viii. 2;<br> xxv. 2, etc.;<br> Maitrāyaṇi Saṃhitā, iii. 14. 19, etc.</ref> The god Rudra is described as the ‘boar of heaven.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_945> Rv. i. 114, 5. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 4, 2;<br> vii. 1, 5, 1. etc.</ref> The use of dogs to hunt the boar is once alluded to.<ref name=fx4_ve2_945> Rv. x. 86, 4, an obscure passage.</ref> The variant form of the word, Varāhu, is not used except metaphorically of divinities.<ref name=fx5_ve2_945> Rv. i. 88, 5;<br> 121, 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 9, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 81, 82;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 67, who points out that, even in the Rigveda, its use is predominantly metraphorical, x. 28, 4, and x. 86, 4, being the only clear instances of the real sense, and of these x. 86, 4, is doubtful. See also Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 66 ''et seq.''</ref>

वरु
<u>'''Varu'''</u> is held by Sāyaṇa to be a proper name in several passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_946> viii. 23, 28;<br> 24, 28;<br> 26, 2.</ref> where it is accented as a vocative followed by ''suṣāmṇe.'' Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_946> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 39, 84, 85.</ref> considers that the name must be Varosuṣāman, despite its doubtful formation.

वरुण-गृहीत
<u>'''Varuṇa-gṛhīta,'''</u> ‘seized by Varuṇa,’ is found in several passages<ref name=fx1_ve2_947> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 2, 1;<br> vi. 4, 2, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 4, 5, 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 4, 1, etc.</ref> as a description of a man afflicted with dropsy, which is the disease sent by Varuṇa as a punishment for sin.<ref name=fx2_ve2_947> Rv. vi. 74, 4;<br> vii. 88. 7;<br> Av. ii. 10, 1;<br> iv. 16, 6. 7;<br> xiv. 1, 57;<br> 2, 49, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 203;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 29, n. 16.</ref> 

वर्चिन्
<u>'''Varcin'''</u> is the name of a foe of Indra in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_948> ii. 14, 6;<br> iv. 30, 14. 15;<br> vi. 47, 21;<br> vii. 99, 5.</ref> Being called a '''[[दास|Dāsa]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_948> Rv. iv. 30, 15;<br> vi. 47, 21.</ref> and coupled with [[शम्बर|Śambara]], he is probably to be regarded as a terrestrial foe, though he is also spoken of as an Asura.<ref name=fx3_ve2_948> Rv. vii. 99, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 152;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 103, n. 3;<br> 3, 273;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 162 (F).</ref> He may possibly have been connected with the '''Vṛcīvants.'''

वर्ण
<u>'''1. Varṇa,'''</u> ‘colour,’ is a common word in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_949> i. 73, 7;<br> 96, 5;<br> 113, 2;<br> iv. 5. 13;<br> ix. 97, 15;<br> 104, 4;<br> 105, 1;<br> x. 3, 3, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_949> Av. i. 22, 1. 2;<br> 23, 2;<br> xi. 8, 16;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 26, etc.</ref> A large number of colours are enumerated in Vedic literature, but it is not possible to deduce any clear information as to the accuracy with which the Vedic Indian distinguished colours, or as to the principle on which his distinctions were based. The Rigveda seems to show that red or yellow colours were the most noticed, but this may be accidental.<ref name=fx3_ve2_949> ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 11, cxxi ''et seq.''</ref> ‘Black’ or ‘dark’ is denoted by ''[[कृष्ण|kṛṣṇa]],'' ‘white’ or ‘light-coloured’ by ''[[शुक्ल|śukla]]'' or ''śveta.'' ‘Black’ seems to be meant in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve2_949> i. 140, 9. ''Cf.'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 8;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 250, 251.</ref> by ''śyenī'' also. ‘Dark-grey’ or ‘dusky’ is expressed by ''[[श्याम|śyāma]].''<ref name=fx5_ve2_949> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, 3, 7.</ref> The sense of ''nīla''<ref name=fx6_ve2_949> The ''nīla'' of the Chāndogya Upaniśad iii. 6, 1, is replaced by ''[[कृष्ण|kṛṣṇa]]'' in the Kausītaki [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] iv. to ''Cf.'' Rv. viii. 19, 31. In the post-Vedic language ''nīla'' describes the colour of dark blue objects, such as indigo, sapphire, etc. That the word already had some such sense in the Rigveda is suggested by its use in allusions to the smoke of Agni.</ref> is doubtful, perhaps ‘dark-blue,’ ‘bluish-black.’ The series of words ''hari, [[हरिण|hariṇa]], harit, [[हरित|harita]],'' seems, on the whole, to denote ‘yellow,’ but ‘green’ is also a possible rendering, since the epithet is used of the frog.<ref name=fx7_ve2_949> Rv. vii. 103, 6, and ''cf.'' iii. 44, 3;<br> Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 365, n.</ref> ‘Brown’ is certainly the meaning of ''[[बभ्रु|babhru]],'' which is used of the '''[[विभीतक|Vibhītaka]]''' nut (see '''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]]'''). ‘Reddish-brown’ seems to be the tinge implied by ''[[कपिल|kapila]]''<ref name=fx8_ve2_949> Rv. x. 27, 16;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 14.</ref> (‘monkey-coloured’), while ''piṅgala'' appears to denote a shade of brown in which yellow pre-  dominates, ‘tawny.’<ref name=fx9_ve2_949> Av. xi. 5, 26;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 6, 2;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 14.</ref> ‘Yellow’ is expressed by ''pīta'' as well as ''pāṇḍu.''<ref name=fx10_ve2_949> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 3, 6.</ref> A garment of saffron (''[[माहारजन|māhārajana]]'') is mentioned in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx11_ve2_949> ''Loc. cit.''</ref> ''Rudhira'' and ''[[लोहित|lohita]]'' are red, while ''aruṇa'' is ‘ruddy.’ ''Kalmāṣa'' means ‘spotted,’<ref name=fx12_ve2_949> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxix. 58.</ref> and ''[[शिल्प|śilpa]]'' ‘dappled,’<ref name=fx13_ve2_949> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 5;<br> xxix. 58;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 22, 1;<br> 6, 13, 1;<br> 20, 1.</ref> while mingled shades like ''aruṇa-[[पिशङ्ग|piśaṅga]],'' ‘reddish brown,’ also occur.<ref name=fx14_ve2_949> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 6, 11, 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 119 ''et seq.''</ref>

वर्ण
<u>'''2. Varṇa'''</u> (lit. ‘colour’) in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_950> ''[[दास|Dāsa]],'' Rv. ii. 12, 4;<br> ''[[आर्य|ārya]] [[वर्ण|varṇa]]'' as against ''[[दस्यु|dasyu]],'' iii. 34, 9;<br> ''[[वर्ण|varṇa]]'' itself opposed to ''[[दास|dāsa]],'' i. 104, 2. ''Cf.'' ii. 3, 5. ''Cf.'' a verse in [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 25, 2;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 14. Roth, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 113, reads ''varṇaśeṣas'' in Rv. v. 65, 5.</ref> is applied to denote classes of men, the '''[[दास|Dāsa]]''' and the Āryan [[वर्ण|Varṇa]] being contrasted, as other passages<ref name=fx2_ve2_950> See '''[[दस्यु|Dasyu]], [[दास|Dāsa]];<br>''' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 113, 114. There is no trace in Vedic literature of any real distinction of colour save this main one. In the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 23, the Brahman's colour is white (''[[शुक्ल|śukla]]'');<br> the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 6, calls the [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] ‘white’ (''[[शुक्ल|śukla]]''), the [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] ‘swarthy’ (''[[धूम्र|dhūmra]]'');<br> and the later view makes the four castes black, yellow (''pīta''), red (''rakta''), and white respectively. See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 10, 11;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 153, etc., 176. ''Cf.'' also Av. iii. 4, 6, where Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 90, with hesitation suggests the reading ''varṇaiḥ,'' ‘castes.’</ref> show, on account of colour. But this use is confined to distinguishing two colours: in this respect the Rigveda differs fundamentally from the later Saṃhitās and Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx3_ve2_950> ''Catvāro varṇāḥ,'' ‘four castes,’ Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 4, 9;<br> vi. 4, 4, 13;<br> ''śaudra [[वर्ण|varṇa]],'' ‘Śūdra caste,’ ''ibid.,'' vi. 4, 4, 9;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 2, 25;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 4. ''Cf.'' also ''[[आर्य|ārya]] [[वर्ण|varṇa]]'' opposed to [[शूद्र|Śūdra]], [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 5;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 17, and see [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 6, 7. ''Vaṇṇa'' appears in this sense sometimes in Pāli. See Fick, ''Die sociale Gliederung,'' 22, n. 4;<br> Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 53.</ref> where the four castes (''varṇāḥ'') are already fully recognized.<br><br>''(a) Caste in the Rigveda.''--The use of the term [[वर्ण|Varṇa]] is not, of course, conclusive for the question whether caste existed in the Rigveda. In one sense it must be admitted to have existed: the [[पुरुष|Puruṣa]]-[[सूक्त|sūkta]], ‘hymn of man,’ in the tenth  Maṇḍala<ref name=fx4_ve2_950> Rv. x. 90, 12 = Av. xix. 6, 6 = Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxi. 11 = [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 12, 5. ''Cf.'' Muir, 12, 7-15, and references.</ref> clearly contemplates the division of mankind into four classes--the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], [[राजन्य|Rājanya]], [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]], and [[शूद्र|Śūdra]]. But the hymn being admittedly late,<ref name=fx5_ve2_950> Max Müller, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 570 ''et seq.;<br>'' Muir, ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 3 ''et seq.;<br>'' Colebrooke, ''Essays,'' 1, 309;<br> Arnold, ''Vedic Metre,'' p. 167.</ref> its evidence is not cogent for the bulk of the Rigveda. Zimmer<ref name=fx6_ve2_950> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 185-203.</ref> has with great force combatted the view that the Rigveda was produced in a society that knew the caste system. He points out that the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx7_ve2_950> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 1. ''Cf.'' Av. xv., and see '''[[व्रात्य|Vrātya]].'''</ref> show us the Vedic Indians on the Indus as unbrahminized, and not under the caste system; he argues that the Rigveda was the product of tribes living in the Indus region and the Panjab; later on a part of this people, who had wandered farther east, developed the peculiar civilization of the caste system. He adopts the arguments of Muir,<ref name=fx8_ve2_950> ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 239 ''et seq.,'' especially 258.</ref> derived from the study of the data of the Rigveda, viz.: that (''a'') the four castes appear only in the late Puruṣasūkta; (''b'') the term [[वर्ण|Varṇa]], as shown above, covers the three highest castes of later times, and is only contrasted with [[दास|Dāsa]]; (''c'') that [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] is rare in the Rigveda, [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] occurs seldom,<ref name=fx9_ve2_950> Rv. viii. 104, 13;<br> x. 109, 3, and ''cf.'' '''[[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]].'''</ref> [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] only in the Puruṣasūkta, where too, alone, [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] and [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] are found; (''d'') that [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] denotes at first ‘poet,’ ‘sage,’ and then ‘officiating priest,’ or still later a special class of priest; (''e'') that in some only of the passages<ref name=fx10_ve2_950> Rv. i. 108, 7;<br> iv. 50, 8 ''et seq.;<br>'' viii. 7, 20;<br> 45, 39;<br> 53, 7;<br> 81, 30;<br> ix. 112, 1;<br> x. 85, 29.</ref> where it occurs does [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] denote a ‘priest by profession,’ while in others it denotes something peculiar to the individual, designating a person distinguished for genius or virtue, or specially chosen to receive divine inspiration.<ref name=fx11_ve2_950> Rv. x. 107, 6;<br> 125, 5.</ref> [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], on the other hand, as Muir admits,<ref name=fx12_ve2_950> ''Op. cit.,'' 2, 259.</ref> already denotes a hereditary professional priesthood.<br><br>Zimmer connects the change from the casteless system of the Rigveda to the elaborate system of the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] with the  advance of the Vedic Indians to the east, comparing the Germanic invasions that transformed the German tribes into monarchies closely allied with the church. The needs of a conquering people evoke the monarch; the lesser princes sink to the position of nobles; for repelling the attacks of aborigines or of other Āryan tribes, and for quelling the revolts of the subdued population, the state requires a standing army in the shape of the armed retainers of the king, and beside the nobility of the lesser princes arises that of the king's chief retainers, as the Thegns supplemented the Gesiths of the Anglo-Saxon monarchies.<ref name=fx13_ve2_950> Maitland, ''Domesday Book,'' 164 ''et seq.''</ref> At the same time the people ceased to take part in military matters, and under climatic influences left the conduct of war to the nobility and their retainers, devoting themselves to agriculture, pastoral pursuits, and trade. But the advantage won by the nobles over the people was shared by them with the priesthood, the origin of whose power lies in the Purohitaship, as Roth first saw.<ref name=fx14_ve2_950> ''Zur Litteratur und Geschichte des Weda,'' 117 ''et seq.''</ref><br><br>Originally the prince could sacrifice for himself and the people, but the Rigveda<ref name=fx15_ve2_950> Rv. iii. 33, 8;<br> vii. 18;<br> 83.</ref> itself shows cases, like those of '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]''' and '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]]''' illustrating forcibly the power of the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], though at the same time the right of the noble to act as [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] is seen in the case of '''[[देवापि आर्ष्टिषेण|Devāpi Ārṣṭiṣeṇa]].'''<ref name=fx16_ve2_950> [[यास्क|Yāska]], [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 10, explaining Rv. x. 98.</ref> The Brahmins saw their opportunity, through the Purohitaship, of gaining practical power during the confusion and difficulties of the wars of invasion, and secured it, though only after many struggles, the traces of which are seen in the Epic tradition.<ref name=fx17_ve2_950> Lassen, ''Indische Alterthumskunde,'' 1^2, 705 ''et seq.;<br>'' Muir, ''op. cit.,'' 2^2, 296479.</ref> The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx18_ve2_950> v. 17-19;<br> Muir, 22, 280-289.</ref> also preserves relics of these conflicts in its narration of the ruin of the '''Sṛñjayas''' because of oppressing Brahmins, and besides other hymns of the Atharvaveda (viiixii), the [[शतरुद्रिय|Śatarudriya]] litany of the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]]<ref name=fx19_ve2_950> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi = [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 1-11 = [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 11-16 = Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9. 1-10.</ref> reflects the period of storm and stress when the aboriginal population was  still seething with discontent, and Rudra was worshipped as the patron god of all sorts of evil doers.<ref name=fx20_ve2_950> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 2, 22 ''et seq.;<br> Indian Literature,'' 110, 111.</ref><br><br>This version of the development of caste has received a good deal of acceptance in its main outlines, and it may almost be regarded as the recognized version.<ref name=fx21_ve2_950> See, ''e.g.,'' von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 152 ''et seq.;<br>'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 159 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' Kaegi, ''Rigveda,'' n. 58.</ref> It has, however, always been opposed by some scholars, such as Haug,<ref name=fx22_ve2_950> ''Brahma und die Brahmanen,'' 1871.</ref> Kern,<ref name=fx23_ve2_950> ''Indische Theorien over de Standenverdeeling,'' 1871. ''Cf.'' for this, and the preceding work, Muir, ''op. cit.,'' 22, 454 ''et seq.''</ref> Ludwig,<ref name=fx24_ve2_950> ''Die Nachrichten des Rig und Atharvaveda über Geographie, Geschichte und Verfassung des alten Indien,'' 36 ''et seq.;<br>'' Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 237-243, etc.</ref> and more recently by Oldenberg<ref name=fx25_ve2_950> ''Religion des Veda,'' 373 ''et seq.,'' and ''cf. Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 51, 267 ''et seq.''</ref> and by Geldner.<ref name=fx26_ve2_950> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 146, n.</ref> The matter may be to some extent simplified by recognizing at once that the caste system is one that has progressively developed, and that it is not legitimate to see in the Rigveda the full caste system even of the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]]; but at the same time it is difficult to doubt that the system was already well on its way to general acceptance. The argument from the nonbrahminical character of the '''Vrātyas''' of the Indus and Panjab loses its force when it is remembered that there is much evidence in favour of placing the composition of the bulk of the Rigveda, especially the books<ref name=fx27_ve2_950> iii. and vii.</ref> in which '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]]''' appears with [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] and [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]], in the east, the later '''[[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]],''' a view supported by Pischel,<ref name=fx28_ve2_950> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 218.</ref> Geldner,<ref name=fx29_ve2_950> ''Ibid.,'' 3, 152.</ref> Hopkins,<ref name=fx30_ve2_950> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 18.</ref> and Macdonell.<ref name=fx31_ve2_950> ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 145.</ref> Nor is it possible to maintain that [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] in the Rigveda merely means a ‘poet’ or ‘sage.’ It is admitted by Muir that in some passages it must mean a hereditary profession; in fact, there is not a single passage in which it occurs where the sense of ‘priest’ is not allowable, since the priest was of course the singer. Moreover, there are traces in the Rigveda of the threefold<ref name=fx32_ve2_950> Rv. viii. 35, 16-18.</ref> or fourfold<ref name=fx33_ve2_950> Rv. i. 113, 6. More doubtful are the references seen by Ludwig to the three castes in ii. 27, 8;<br> vi. 51, 2;<br> vii. 66, 10.</ref> division of the people  into ''brahma, kṣatram,'' and ''viśaḥ,'' or into the three classes and the servile population. Nor even in respect to the later period, any more than to the Rigveda, is the view correct that regards the Vaiśyas as not taking part in war. The Rigveda evidently<ref name=fx34_ve2_950> See Ludwig, ''op. cit.,'' 3, 231 ''et seq.,'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 94, 95, and see '''[[विश्|Viś]], [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]].'''</ref> knows of no restriction of war to a nobility and its retainers, but the late Atharvaveda<ref name=fx35_ve2_950> iii. 19, 1;<br> ix. 7, 9;<br> xv. 9, 2. 3.</ref> equally classes the folk with the ''bala,'' ‘power,’ representing the [[विश्|Viś]] as associated with the '''[[सभा|Sabhā]], [[सम्इति|Samiti]],''' and '''[[सेना|Senā]],''' the assemblies of the people and the armed host. Zimmer<ref name=fx36_ve2_950> ''Op. cit.,'' 194.</ref> explains these references as due to tradition only; but this is hardly a legitimate argument, resting, as it does, on the false assumption that only a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] can fight. But it is (see '''[[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]''') very doubtful whether [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] means anything more than a member of the nobility, though later, in the Epic, it included the retainers of the nobility, who increased in numbers with the growth of military monarchies, and though later the ordinary people did not necessarily take part in wars, an abstention that is, however, much exaggerated if it is treated as an absolute one. The Kṣatriyas were no doubt a hereditary body; monarchy was already hereditary (see '''[[राजन्|Rājan]]'''), and it is admitted that the Śūdras were a separate body: thus all the elements of the caste system were already in existence. The [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], indeed, was a person of great importance, but it is clear, as Oldenberg<ref name=fx37_ve2_950> ''Religion des Veda,'' 382, 383.</ref> urges, that he was not the creator of the power of the priesthood, but owed his position, and the influence he could in consequence exert, to the fact that the sacrifice required for its proper performance the aid of a hereditary priest in whose possession was the traditional sacred knowledge.<br><br>Nor can any argument for the non-existence of the caste system be derived from cases like that of '''Devāpi.''' For, in the first place, the Upaniṣads show kings in the exercise of the priestly functions of learning and teaching, and the Upaniṣads are certainly contemporaneous with an elaborated caste system. In the second place the Rigvedic evidence is very weak, for Devāpi, who certainly acts as [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], is not stated in the  Rigveda to be a prince at all, though [[यास्क|Yāska]]<ref name=fx38_ve2_950> ii. 10.</ref> calls him a [[कौरव्य|Kauravya]]; the hymns attributed to kings and others cannot be vindicated for them by certain evidence, though here, again, the Brāhmaṇas do not scruple to recognize Rājanyarṣis, or ‘royal sages’; and the famous [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] shows in the Rigveda no sign of the royal character which the Brāhmaṇas insist on fastening on him in the shape of royal descent in the line of '''[[जह्नु|Jahnu]].'''<ref name=fx39_ve2_950> See '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]''' and '''[[जह्नु|Jahnu]].'''</ref><br><br>''(b) Caste in the later Saṃhitās and Brāhmaṇas.''--The relation between the later and the earlier periods of the Vedic history of caste must probably be regarded in the main as the hardening of a system already formed by the time of the Rigveda.<br><br>1. ''The Names of the Castes.''--The most regular names are [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], [[राजन्य|Rājanya]], [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]], and [[शूद्र|Śūdra]],<ref name=fx40_ve2_950> Rv. x. 90;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 1, 4. 5;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 19, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 4, 12;<br> iii. 1, 1, 10;<br> v. 5, 4, 9;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 1, 6-11.</ref> or later [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]], [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]], and [[शूद्र|Śūdra]].<ref name=fx41_ve2_950> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 2, 27 (Mādhyaṃdina = i. 4, 15 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 4, 4, 13;<br> xiii. 6, 2, 10;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 5.</ref> There are many other variants: [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], [[क्षत्र|Kṣatra]], Śūdrāryau;<ref name=fx42_ve2_950> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 10, 1-3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiv. 28-30.</ref> [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], [[राजन्य|Rājanya]], [[शूद्र|Śūdra]], [[आर्य|Ārya]];<ref name=fx43_ve2_950> Av. xix. 32, 8. ''Cf.'' 62, 1. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 949, 1003.</ref> [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], [[राजन्य|Rājanya]], [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]], [[शूद्र|Śūdra]];<ref name=fx44_ve2_950> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 1.</ref> [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], [[राजन्|Rājan]], Viśya, [[शूद्र|Śūdra]];<ref name=fx45_ve2_950> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 7, 6, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xl. 13;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 48;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 6, 4, 9, etc.</ref> Deva, [[राजन्|Rājan]], [[शूद्र|Śūdra]], [[आर्य|Ārya]];<ref name=fx46_ve2_950> Av. xix. 62, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxvi. 2. ''Cf.'' '''Arya, [[आर्य|Ārya]].'''</ref> and [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], [[क्षत्र|Kṣatra]], [[विश्|Viś]], and [[शूद्र|Śūdra]].<ref name=fx47_ve2_950> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 2, 13, (Mādhyaṃdina = i. 4, 15 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> In other cases the fourth class is represented by a special member: [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]], [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]], and [[चाण्डाल|Cāṇḍāla]].<ref name=fx48_ve2_950> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 10, 7.</ref> Often only the three upper classes are mentioned, as [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], [[राजन्य|Rājanya]], [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]];<ref name=fx49_ve2_950> Av. v. 17, 9;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 5;<br> 2, 2;<br> iv. 4, 9 (with [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] before [[राजन्य|Rājanya]]);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 12, 9, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 5, 2. 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 8, 8.</ref> [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], Kṣatram, [[विश्|Viś]],<ref name=fx50_ve2_950> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 10-12;<br> xxxviii. 14;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 4, 11;<br> xi. 2, 7, 15 ''et seq.;<br>'' xiv. 2, 2, 30;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iv. 10, 10-12.</ref>  etc.<ref name=fx51_ve2_950> ''Cf.'' Av. v. 18, 15, where the two lower castes are addressed ([[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] and [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]]) respectively as ''[[नृ-पति|nṛ-pati]]'' and ''[[पशु|paśu]]-pati,'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 252;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 1;<br> xxix. 10;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxviii. 19.</ref> Three castes--[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], [[राजन्|Rājan]], [[शूद्र|Śūdra]]--are mentioned in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx52_ve2_950> x. 1, 13.</ref> and two castes are repeatedly mentioned together, either [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] and [[क्षत्र|Kṣatra]], or [[क्षत्र|Kṣatra]] and [[विश्|Viś]].<ref name=fx53_ve2_950> See '''[[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]], [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]], [[विश्|Viś]].'''</ref><br><br>2. ''The Relation of the Castes.''--The ritual literature is full of minute differences respecting the castes. Thus, for example, the Śatapatha prescribes different sizes of funeral mounds for the four castes,<ref name=fx54_ve2_950> xiii. 8, 3, 11.</ref> Different modes of address are laid down for the four castes,<ref name=fx55_ve2_950> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 4, 12.</ref> as ''ehi,'' ‘approach’; ''āgaccha,'' ‘come’; ''ādrava,'' ‘run up’; ''ādhāva,'' ‘hasten up,’ which differ in degrees of politeness. The representatives of the four castes are dedicated at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) to different deities.<ref name=fx56_ve2_950> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 1, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 6, 2, 10. For other similar differences in the Brāhmaṇas, see [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 10, 1. 2;<br> vii. 1, 1, 4. 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 4;<br> xxxvii. 1;<br> xxxix. 7;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 10;<br> xiv. 24;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 23. 24;<br> viii. 4, etc.</ref> The Sūtras have many similar rules.<ref name=fx57_ve2_950> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 24, 11. 12, and see Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 20 ''et seq.''</ref><br><br>But the three upper castes in some respects differ markedly from the fourth, the Śūdras. The latter are in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx58_ve2_950> iii. 1, 1, 10. ''Cf.'' Āpastamba, cited in scholia on Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vii. 5, 7;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 8, 7;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 12 ''et seq.'' Generally Śūdras are impure, and cannot be allowed at the place of sacrifice (''deva-yajana''), Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 1, 9. ''Cf.'' v. 3, 3, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 1, 6;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 10 (Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 8, does not contain this notice).</ref> declared not fit to be addressed by a Dīkṣita, ‘consecrated person,’ and no [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] is to milk the cow whose milk is to be used for the Agnihotra<ref name=fx59_ve2_950> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxi. 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 3.</ref> (‘fire-oblation’). On the other hand, in certain passages, the [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] is given a place in the Soma sacrifice,<ref name=fx60_ve2_950> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 4, 9. ''Cf.'' also ''ibid.,'' i. 1, 4, 12. The scholiast on Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 1, 6, refers these notices to the [[रथकार|Rathakāra]] alone, but this is obviously secondary.</ref> and in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx61_ve2_950> i. 1, 4, 8.</ref> there are given formulæ for the placing of the sacrificial fire not only for the three upper castes, but also for the '''[[रथकार|Rathakāra]],'''  ‘chariot-maker.’ Again, in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx62_ve2_950> vii. 19, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 4, 6;<br> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 6;<br> Lévi, ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 81.</ref> the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] is opposed as ‘eater of the oblation’ to the members of the other three castes.<br><br>The characteristics of the several castes are given under '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]''' and '''[[राजन्|Rājan]], [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]], [[शूद्र|Śūdra]]:''' they may be briefly summed up as follows: The [[विश्|Viś]] forms the basis of the state on which the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] and [[क्षत्र|Kṣatra]] rest;<ref name=fx63_ve2_950> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 2, 7, 16;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 4.</ref> the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] and [[क्षत्र|Kṣatra]] are superior to the [[विश्|Viś]];<ref name=fx64_ve2_950> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 8, 2;<br> xi. 11, 9;<br> xv. 6, 3;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 33, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxix. 10;<br>  [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 10, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 4, 4, 13, etc.</ref> while all three classes are superior to the Śūdras. The real power of the state rested with the king and his nobles, with their retainers, who may be deemed the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] element. Engaged in the business of the protection of the country, its administration, the decision of legal cases, and in war, the nobles subsisted, no doubt, on the revenues in kind levied from the people, the king granting to them villages (see '''[[ग्राम|Grāma]]''') for their maintenance, while some of them, no doubt, had lands of their own cultivated for them by slaves or by tenants. The states were seemingly small:<ref name=fx65_ve2_950> ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 32, for the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]. The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] and the later parts of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], with their traditions of Aśvamedhas, ‘horse sacrifices,’ and their recollections of the glories of the '''Bharatas,''' represent a more advanced stage of social relations and of city life, but even they hardly know really great kingdoms.</ref> there are no clear signs of any really large kingdoms, despite the mention of '''Mahārājas.''' The people, engaged in agriculture, pastoral pursuits, and trade ('''[[वणिज्|Vaṇij]]'''), paid tribute to the king and nobles for the protection afforded them. That, as BadenPowell suggests,<ref name=fx66_ve2_950> ''Indian Village Community'' and ''Village Communities in India,'' where much stress is laid on the idea of a settlement of Āryans on lands already occupied by Dravidian clans, much as Anglo-Saxon invaders on one theory occupied lands already held by Britons who became serfs, while the invaders were a landholding aristocracy, a theory supported by the fact that the normal holding of a hide is estimated at 120 acres.</ref> they were not themselves agriculturists is probably erroneous; some might be landowners on a large scale, and draw their revenues from [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] tenants, or even Āryan tenants, but that the people as a whole were in this  position is extremely unlikely.<ref name=fx67_ve2_950> ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''India, Old and New,'' 222. The point is much the same as that at issue between the different schools of opinion as to early English history. Did the Āryans in India occupy the land as a people, driving out or exterminating or enslaving the Dāsas, and themselves carrying on the occupations of a people, or did they merely form a small aristocracy of superior military force, and were the Kṣatriyas the true Āryans? The evidence of the Rigveda is really fatal to the latter alternative hypothesis.</ref> In war the people shared the conflicts of the nobles, for there was not yet any absolute separation of the functions of the several classes. The priests may be divided into two classes--the Purohitas of the kings, who guided their employers by their counsel, and were in a position to acquire great influence in the state, as it is evident they actually did, and the ordinary priests who led quiet lives, except when they were engaged on some great festival of a king or a wealthy noble.<ref name=fx68_ve2_950> For the superiority of the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] to the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] or [[राजन्य|Rājanya]], see [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 11, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxi. 21;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, 1, 12;<br> 4, 4, 15;<br> xiii. 1, 9, 1;<br> 3, 7, 8;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 15, 8;<br> viii. 9, 6;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 20, 12. The [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] is, in his turn, dependent on the king (Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 3, 3;<br> v. 4, 2, 7), and at the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]] sits beside him, but is none the less superior (Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 2, 23). The [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxviii. 5, says the [[क्षत्र|Kṣatra]] is over the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], but this is not a usual view. ''Cf.'' xxvii. 4. A [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] can get along without a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]], but not ''vice versa'' (Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 4, 6), and a [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] with a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] surpasses all other Rājanyas ([[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 10, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xix. 10;<br> xxvii. 4, etc.).</ref><br><br>The relations and functions of the castes are well summed up in a passage of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx69_ve2_950> vii. 29. See Muir, ''op. cit.,'' 1^2, 436 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 14.</ref> which treats of them as opposed to the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]. The [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] is a receiver of gifts (''ā-dāyī''), a drinker of Soma (''ā-pāyī''), a seeker of food (''āvasāyī''),<ref name=fx70_ve2_950> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 9, 326;<br> 10, 14, prefers ‘moving’ or ‘dwelling’ everywhere.</ref> and liable to removal at will (''yathākāma-prayāpyaḥ'').<ref name=fx71_ve2_950> Muir, Haug, and Weber take the word as active in sense, ‘moving at will.’ But both the parallelism of the passage and the formation of the word require a passive causative sense. The reference is perhaps to the general political control of the king over the priest, whom he can ‘move on’ from place to place.</ref> The [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] is tributary to another (''anyasya balikṛt''), to be lived on by another (''anyasyādyaḥ''), and to be oppressed at will (''yathākāma-jyeyaḥ'').<ref name=fx72_ve2_950> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 29, 3.</ref> The [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] is the servant of another (''anyasya preṣyaḥ''), to be expelled at will (''kāmotthāpyaḥ''), and to be slain  at pleasure (''yathākāma-vadhyaḥ'').<ref name=fx73_ve2_950> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 29, 4.</ref> The descriptions seem calculated to show the relation of each of the castes to the [[राजन्य|Rājanya]]. Even the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] he can control, whilst the [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] is his inferior and tributary, whom he can remove without cause from his land,<ref name=fx74_ve2_950> This seems to be the most probable reference of ''yathākāmajyeyaḥ.'' The expulsion of the [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] is here not in allusion to quasi-ownership of land by the King or [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]];<br> it is an act of royal authority, not an incident of tenure. See Keith, ''Journal of the African Society,'' 6, 202 ''et seq.,'' and ''cf.'' Hopkins, ''India, Old and New,'' 222, 223.</ref> but who is still free, and whom he cannot maim or slay without due process. The [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] has no rights of property or life against the noble, especially the king.<br><br>The passage is a late one, and the high place of the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] is to some extent accounted for by this fact. It is clear that in the course of time the [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] fell more and more in position with the hardening of the divisions of caste. Weber<ref name=fx75_ve2_950> ''Ueber den [[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]],'' 10 ''et seq.''</ref> shows reason for believing that the [[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]] sacrifice, a festival of which a chariot race forms an integral part,<ref name=fx76_ve2_950> ''Ibid. Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 247;<br> ''Festgruss an Bo7htlingk,'' 40 ''et seq.;<br> Rituallitteratur,'' 141.</ref> was, as the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx77_ve2_950> xvi. 17, 4. ''Cf.'' xv. 1, 1.</ref> says, once a sacrifice for a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]], as well as for a priest or king. But the king, too, had to suffer diminution of his influence at the hands of the priest: the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] texts<ref name=fx78_ve2_950> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 6, 2, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 6, 1. ''Cf.'' Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 11, 1;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 9, 19;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41. xxiv. xxv.</ref> show that the [[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]] was originally a lesser sacrifice which, in the case of a king, was followed by the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]], or consecration of him as an overlord of lesser kings, and in that of the Brahmin by the [[बृहस्पतिसव|Bṛhaspatisava]], a festival celebrated on his appointment as a royal [[पुरोहित|Purohita]]. But the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx79_ve2_950> v. 1, 1, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' 2, 1, 19;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 1, 1-2. Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 8, 9, interprets the situation differently from Eggeling.</ref> exalts the [[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]], in which a priest could be the sacrificer, over the [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]], from which he was excluded, and identifies it with the [[बृहस्पतिसव|Bṛhaspatisava]], a clear piece of juggling in the interests of the priestly pretentions. But we must not overestimate the value of such passages, or the exaltation of the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] in the later books of the Śatapatha  and [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Brāhmaṇas as evidence of a real growth in the priestly power: these books represent the views of the priests of what their own powers should be, and to some extent were in the [[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]]. Another side of the picture is presented in the Pāli literature,<ref name=fx80_ve2_950> Fick, ''Dic sociale Gliederung,'' 107 ''et seq.;<br>'' Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 53 ''et seq.;<br>'' 158.</ref> which, belonging to a later period than the Vedic, undoubtedly underestimates the position of the priests; while the Epic,<ref name=fx81_ve2_950> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 984 ''et seq.''</ref> more nearly contemporaneous with the later Vedic period, displays, despite all priestly redaction, the temporal superiority of the nobility in clear light.<br><br>Although clear distinctions were made between the different castes, there is little trace in Vedic literature of one of the leading characteristics of the later system, the impurity communicated by the touch or contact of the inferior castes,<ref name=fx82_ve2_950> See, ''e.g.'' Manu, iii. 239;<br> v. 85;<br> Fick, ''op. cit.,'' 26 ''et seq.''</ref> which is seen both directly in the purification rendered necessary in case of contact with a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]], and indirectly in the prohibition of eating in company with men of lower caste.<ref name=fx83_ve2_950> [[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiv. 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvii. 17;<br> Āpastamba [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 6, 18, 16 ''et seq.;<br>'' ii. 4, 9, 7, with Bühler's note;<br> Manu, iv. 210 ''et seq.;<br>'' Viṣṇu, 41, 7 ''et seq.;<br>'' Fick, ''op. cit.,'' 30-33, who points out that the Jātakas cohtain little evidence on the practice. Senart, ''Les Castes dans l'Inde,'' 48 ''et seq.,'' 212 ''et seq.,'' attributes great importance to the question of eating together, and compares the sacrificial meals of the ''gens'' at Rome, where strangers were excluded (Fustel de Coulanges, ''La Cité Antique,'' 117). But this is not conclusive;<br> a caste is not a ''gens,'' and the ''gens'' excluded strangers only at a solemn festival, when the whole ''gens'' renewed its blood kinship. If we have no evidence exactly establishing this for the [[गोत्र|Gotra]] in early Vedic literature, we need not nesitate to believe that in the earliest Vedic period the [[गोत्र|Gotra]] had solemn festivals of union, and of communication with the dead, but that again does not explain or amount to the caste prohibition of taking food from an inferior.</ref> It is true that prohibition of eating in company with others does appear,<ref name=fx84_ve2_950> ''E.g.,'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 3, 3. with Keith's note.</ref> but not in connexion with caste: its purpose is to preserve the peculiar sanctity of those who perform a certain rite or believe in a certain doctrine; for persons who eat of the same food together, according to primitive thought, acquire the same characteristics and enter into a sacramental communion. But Vedic literature does not yet show that to take food from an inferior caste was forbidden as destroying  purity.<ref name=fx85_ve2_950> For a case of objection to eating food after another, see Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 10, 1. Possibly the idea there is that eating the food of a chief is dangerous, since the eater thus enters into possession of part of his substance, and consequently at once becomes an object of anger to the chief, as well as of danger to himself;<br> for the chief may be so full of divine force that it would be unsafe for an ordinary man to be assimilated to him--a common idea in primitive societies. See also [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 8, 13.</ref> Nor, of course, has the caste system developed the constitution with a head, a council, and common festivals which the modern caste has; for such an organization is not found even in the Epic or in the Pāli literature.<ref name=fx86_ve2_950> Fick, ''op. cit.,'' 24. Senart, ''op. cit.,'' 219, 220, compares the family councils of Greece, Rome, and Germany (Leist, ''Altarisches Jus Civile,'' 273 ''et seq.;<br>'' Kovalevsky, ''Famille et Propriété Primitives,'' 119;<br> Fustel de Coulanges, ''op. cit.,'' 118, 119). But here again the system may have applied to the [[गोत्र|Gotra]] without its really explaining the later appearance of the practice in the caste, and the absence of the mention of a council in the early and late literature alike is conclusive against its existence.</ref> The Vedic characteristics of caste are heredity, pursuit of a common occupation, and restriction on intermarriage.<br><br>3. ''Restrictions on Intermarriage.''--Arrian, in his ''Indica,''<ref name=fx87_ve2_950> xii. 8. 9.</ref> probably on the authority of Megasthenes, makes the prohibition of marriage between , no doubt ‘castes,’ a characteristic of Indian life. The evidence of Pāli literature<ref name=fx88_ve2_950> Fick, ''op. cit.,'' 34-40.</ref> is in favour of this view, though it shows that a king could marry whom he wished, and could make his son by that wife the heir appearent. But it equally shows that there were others who held that not the father's but the mother's rank determined the social standing of the son. Though Manu<ref name=fx89_ve2_950> x. 5;<br> iii. 15.</ref> recognizes the possibility of marriage with the next lower caste as producing legitimate children, still he condemns the marriage of an Āryan with a woman of lower caste. The Pāraskara [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx90_ve2_950> i. 4. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 21, 74.</ref> allows the marriage of a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] with a wife of his own caste or of the lower caste, of a Brahmin with a wife of his own caste or of the two lower classes, and of a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] with a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] wife only. But it quotes the opinion of others that all of them can marry a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] wife, while other authorities condemn the marriage with a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] wife in certain circumstances, which implies that in other cases it might be justified.<ref name=fx91_ve2_950> Gobhila [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 2, 42.</ref> The earlier  literature bears out this impression: much stress is laid on descent from a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]], and on purity of descent;<ref name=fx92_ve2_950> See [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 6, 1, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vii. 46;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 4, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 3, 4, 19;<br> xii. 4, 4, 6;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxv. 3, 17;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 1, 7;<br> [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 67, etc. So one of the characteristics of a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] given in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 7, 1, is ''brāhmaṇya,'' which Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 10, 69, takes as referring to descent. ''[[ब्रह्म-पुत्र|Brahma-putra]]'' is a title of honour, Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 4, 1, 2. 9;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 18, 12;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 21, 1. 2;<br> and to be born the son of a wise [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] is the highest fortune, Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 29.</ref> but there is other evidence for the view that even a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] need not be of pure lineage. '''[[कवष|Kavaṣa]]''' [[ऐलूष|Ailūṣa]] is taunted with being the son of a Dāsī, ‘slave woman,’<ref name=fx93_ve2_950> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 19, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 311;<br> 9, 42, 44, 46.</ref> and '''[[वत्स|Vatsa]]''' was accused of being a Śūdrā's son, but established his purity by walking unhurt through the flames of a fire ordeal.<ref name=fx94_ve2_950> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 6. 6.</ref> He who is learned (''śuśruvān'') is said to be a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], descended from a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] (''ārṣeya''), in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā;<ref name=fx95_ve2_950> vi. 6, 1, 4.</ref> and '''[[सत्यकाम|Satyakāma]],''' son of '''[[जबाला|Jabālā]],''' was accepted as a pupil by '''[[हारिद्रुमत|Hāridrumata]]''' [[गौतम|Gautama]], though he could not name his father.<ref name=fx96_ve2_950> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 4;<br> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 1, 263. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 4, 1.</ref> The [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx97_ve2_950> xxx. 1. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 3, 462.</ref> says that knowledge is all-important, not descent. But all this merely goes to show that there was a measure of laxity in the hereditary character of caste, not that it was not based on heredity. The [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx98_ve2_950> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 19, 3. 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], iv. 7;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 30. 31. The word Arya here must refer in all probability to any Āryan, not merely to a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]], Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 10, 6.</ref> recognize the illicit union of [[आर्य|Ārya]] and [[शूद्रा|Śūdrā]], and ''vice versa:'' it is not unlikely that if illicit unions took place, legal marriage was quite possible. The [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx99_ve2_950> xiv. 11, 17;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 56, n. But there is no mention here of Uśij being a slave.</ref> indeed, recognizes such a case in that of '''[[दीर्घतमस्|Dīrghatamas]],''' son of the slave girl Uśij, if we may adopt the description of Uśij given in the Bṛhaddevatā.<ref name=fx100_ve2_950> iv. 24. 25.</ref><br><br>In a hymn of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx101_ve2_950> v. 17, 8. 9. See Muir, 12, 282, n. 76;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 249. The exact sense is not clear, but the passage is intended to show in the strongest light the high position of the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].</ref> extreme claims are put  forward for the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], who alone is a true husband and the real husband, even if the woman has had others, a [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] or a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]]: a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] husband is not mentioned, probably on purpose.<ref name=fx102_ve2_950> The sense of v. 17, 18, is obscure;<br> it can be interpreted to mean that the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] should be provided with a temporary wife on each occasion when he pays a visit (''cf.'' Whitney, 250). But this is hardly likely. Muir takes it as referring to his own wife.</ref> The marriage of Brāhmaṇas with [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] women is illustrated by the cases of '''[[सुकन्या|Sukanyā]],''' daughter of king '''[[शर्यात|Śaryāta]],''' who married '''[[च्यवन|Cyavana]],'''<ref name=fx103_ve2_950> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 5, 7. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 244, 245;<br> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 10, 73 ''et seq.;<br>'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 352, 353.</ref> and of '''Rathavīti's''' daughter, who married '''[[श्यावाश्व|Śyāvāśva]].'''<ref name=fx104_ve2_950> ''Cf.'' Bṛhaddevatā, v. 50 ''et seq.''</ref><br><br>4. ''Occupation and Caste.''--The Greek authorities<ref name=fx105_ve2_950> Arrian, ''Indica,'' xii. 8. 9;<br> Strabo, xv. 4, 49.</ref> and the evidence of the Jātakas<ref name=fx106_ve2_950> Fick, ''op. cit.,'' 40 ''et seq.''</ref> concur in showing it to have been the general rule that each caste was confined to its own occupations, but that the Brāhmaṇas did engage in many professions beside that of simple priest, while all castes gave members to the Śramaṇas, or homeless ascetics. The Jātakas<ref name=fx107_ve2_950> Rhys Davids, ''op. cit.,'' 54 ''et seq.''</ref> recognize the Brahmins as engaged in all sorts of occupations, as merchants, traders, agriculturists, and so forth. Matters are somewhat simpler in Vedic literature, where the Brāhmaṇas and Kṣatriyas appear as practically confined to their own professions of sacrifice and military or administrative functions. Ludwig<ref name=fx108_ve2_950> ''Op. cit.,'' 3, 237 ''et seq.''</ref> sees in '''[[दीर्घश्रवस्|Dīrghaśravas]]''' in the Rigveda<ref name=fx109_ve2_950> i. 112, 11.</ref> a Brahmin reduced by indigence to acting as a merchant, as allowed even later by the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] literature; but this is not certain, though it is perfectly possible. More interesting is the question how far the Kṣatriyas practised the duties of priests; the evidence here is conflicting. The best known case is, of course, that of '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]].''' In the Rigveda he appears merely as a priest who is attached to the court of '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]],''' king of the '''Tṛtsus;''' but in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx110_ve2_950> xxi. 12, 2. See Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 54.</ref> he is called a king, a descendant of '''[[जह्नु|Jahnu]],''' and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx111_ve2_950> vii. 18, 9. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 21, where the reading is different, but worse. But see Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 16.</ref> refers to '''Śunaḥśepa's'''  succeeding, through his adoption by [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]], to the divine lore (''[[दैव|daiva]] veda'') of the '''Gāthins''' and the lordship of the Jahnus. That in fact this tradition is correct seems most improbable, but it serves at least to illustrate the existence of seers of royal origin. Such figures appear more than once in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx112_ve2_950> xii. 12, 6;<br> xviii. 10, 5. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 235, n. 3.</ref> which knows the technical terms '''[[राजन्यर्षि|Rājanyarṣi]]''' and '''[[देवराजन्|Devarājan]]''' corresponding to the later Rājarṣi, ‘royal sage.’ The Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx113_ve2_950> P. 562 of the manuscript, cited by Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 154, n.</ref> says of one who knows a certain doctrine, ‘being a king he becomes a seer’ (''rājā sann ṛṣir bhavati''), and the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx114_ve2_950> i. 4, 2. ''Cf.'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 17, 6, where [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] is addressed as [[राजपुत्र|Rājaputra]].</ref> applies the term [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] to a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. Again, it is argued that '''[[देवापि आर्ष्टिषेण|Devāpi Ārṣṭiṣeṇa]],''' who acted as [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], according to the Rigveda,<ref name=fx115_ve2_950> x. 98. See Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 196;<br> Senart, ''Les Castes dans l'Inde,'' 165;<br> Muir, 12, 269 ''et seq.''</ref> for '''Śantanu,''' was a prince, as [[यास्क|Yāska]]<ref name=fx116_ve2_950> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 10.</ref> says or implies he was.<ref name=fx117_ve2_950> It may be added that a family of Ārṣṭiṣeṇas appear as ritual authorities in a scholium on Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 9, 3;<br> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 10. 95.</ref> But this assumption seems to be only an error of Yāska's. Since nothing in the Rigveda alludes to any relationship, it is impossible to accept Sieg's view<ref name=fx118_ve2_950> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 142.</ref> that the Rigveda recognizes the two as brothers, but presents the fact of a prince acting the part of [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] as unusual and requiring explanation. The principle, however, thus accepted by Sieg as to princes in the Rigveda seems sound enough. Again, Muir<ref name=fx119_ve2_950> ''Op. cit.,'' 12, 265 ''et seq.''</ref> has argued that Hindu tradition, as shown in Sāyaṇa,<ref name=fx120_ve2_950> On Rv. i. 100;<br> iv. 42. 43. 44;<br> v. 27;<br> vi. 15;<br> x. 9. 75. 133. 134. 148. 179, etc.</ref> regards many hymns of the Rigveda as composed by royal personages, but he admits that in many cases the ascription is wrong; it may be added that in the case of '''Pṛthī [[वैन्य|Vainya]],''' where the hymn<ref name=fx121_ve2_950> x. 148, 5.</ref> ascribed to him seems to be his, it is not shown in the hymn itself that he is other than a seer; the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx122_ve2_950> v. 3, 5, 4.</ref> calls him a king, but that is probably of no more value than the later tradition as to [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]. The case of '''Viśvantara'''  and the '''Śyāparṇas''' mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx123_ve2_950> vii. 27 ''et seq.''</ref> has been cited<ref name=fx124_ve2_950> Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 196.</ref> as that of a king sacrificing without priestly aid, but the interpretation is quite uncertain, while the parallel of the '''Kaśyapas, Asitamṛgas,''' and '''Bhūtavīras''' mentioned in the course of the narrative renders it highly probable that the king had other priests to carry out the sacrifice.<br><br>Somewhat different are a series of other cases found in the Upaniṣads, where the Brahma doctrine is ascribed to royal persons. Thus '''[[जनक|Janaka]]''' is said in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx125_ve2_950> xi. 6, 2, 10;<br> Muir, 12, 426-430.</ref> to have become a [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]]; '''[[अजातशत्रु|Ajātaśatru]]''' taught '''[[गार्ग्य|Gārgya]] [[बालाकि|Bālāki]];'''<ref name=fx126_ve2_950> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1, 1;<br> Kauṣitaki [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1.</ref> '''[[प्रवाहण जैवलि|Pravāhaṇa Jaivali]]''' instructed '''[[श्वेतकेतु|Śvetaketu]] [[आरुणेय|Āruṇeya]],'''<ref name=fx127_ve2_950> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 1 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 2, 1 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 3, 1.</ref> as well as '''[[शिलक शालावत्य|Śilaka Śālāvatya]]'''<ref name=fx128_ve2_950> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 8, 1.</ref> and '''[[चैकितायन|Caikitāyana]] [[दाल्भ्य|Dālbhya]];''' and '''[[अश्वपति|Aśvapati]] [[कैकेय|Kaikeya]]''' taught Brahmins.<ref name=fx129_ve2_950> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 6, 1, 2.</ref> It has been deduced<ref name=fx130_ve2_950> Deussen, ''Allgemcine Geschichte der Philosophie,'' 1, 2, 354;<br> ''Philosophy of the Upanishads,'' 17 ''et seq.;<br>'' Garbe, ''Beiträge zur indischen Kulturgeschichte,'' 1 ''et seq.;<br> Philosophy of Ancient India,'' 73 ''et seq.;<br>'' Grierson, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 602 ''et seq.;<br>'' Winternitz. ''Geschichte der indischen Litteratur,'' 1, 256 ''et seq.''</ref> from such passages that the Brahma doctrine was a product of the Kṣatriyas. This conclusion is, however, entirely doubtful,<ref name=fx131_ve2_950> Bloomfield, ''Religion of the Veda,'' 218 ''et seq.;<br>'' Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 838, 868, 1142;<br> ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 50, 51, 257;<br> Oldenberg. ''Buddha,''^5 73, n. 1.</ref> for kings were naturally willing to be flattered by the ascription to them of philosophic activity, and elsewhere<ref name=fx132_ve2_950> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 1, 4, 10.</ref> the opinion of a [[राजन्य|Rājanya]] is treated with contempt.<br><br>It is probably a fair deduction that the royal caste did not much concern itself with the sacred lore of the priests, though it is not unlikely that individual exceptions occurred. But that warriors became priests, that an actual change of caste took place, is quite unproved by a single genuine example. That it was impossible we cannot say, but it seems not to have taken place. To be distinguished from a caste change, as Fick<ref name=fx133_ve2_950> ''Op. cit.,'' 44, n. 1.</ref> points out, is the fact that a member of any caste could, in the later period at least, become a [[श्रमण|Śramaṇa]], as is recorded in effect  of many kings in the Epic.<ref name=fx134_ve2_950> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 179 ''et seq.,'' who treats this as a change of caste.</ref> Whether the practice is Vedic is not clear: [[यास्क|Yāska]]<ref name=fx135_ve2_950> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 10. He went to the forest and practised asceticism, which is not necessarily a change of caste.</ref> records it of Devāpi, but this is not evidence for times much anterior to the rise of Buddhism.<br><br>On the other hand, the Brahmins, or at least the Purohitas, accompanied the princes in battle, and probably, like the mediæval clergy, were not unprepared to fight,<ref name=fx136_ve2_950> See Rv. iii. 53, 12. 13;<br> i. 129, 4;<br> 152, 7;<br> 157, 2;<br> vii. 83, 4;<br> x. 38;<br> 103, etc;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 220-226;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 135, n. 3.</ref> as [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] and [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] seem to have done, and as priests do even in the Epic from time to time.<ref name=fx137_ve2_950> Hopkins, ''op. cit.,'' 13, 184.</ref> But a priest cannot be said to change caste by acting in this way.<br><br>More generally the possibility of the occurrence of change of caste may be seen in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx138_ve2_950> x. 4, 1, 10.</ref> where '''[[श्यापर्ण सायकायन|Śyāparṇa Sāyakāyana]]''' is represented as speaking of his offspring as if they could have become the nobles, priests, and commons of the Śalvas; and in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx139_ve2_950> vii. 29.</ref> where Viśvantara is told that if the wrong offering were made his children would be of the three other castes. A drunken [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] of the Rigveda<ref name=fx140_ve2_950> iii. 43, 5.</ref> talks as if he could be converted into a king. On the other hand, certain kings, such as '''[[पर आट्णार|Para Āṭṇāra]],''' are spoken of as performers of Sattras, ‘sacrificial sessions.’<ref name=fx141_ve2_950> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 16, 3. ''Cf.'' for their share in the piling of the sacrificial altar, [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 6, 5, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxii. 3 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 473);<br> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 10. 25.</ref> As evidence for caste exchange all this amounts to little; later a Brahmin might become a king, while the [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in the Rigveda is represented as speaking in a state of intoxication; the great kings could be called sacrificers if, for the nonce, they were consecrated (''dīkṣita''), and so temporarily became Brahmins.<ref name=fx142_ve2_950> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 1, 13;<br> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 10, 17, and ''cf.'' the case of [[जनक|Janaka]], Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 6, 2, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> The hypothetical passages, too, do not help much. It would be unwise to deny the possibility of caste exchange, but it is not clearly indicated by any record. Even cases like that of [[सत्यकाम|Satyakāma]] [[जाबाल|Jābāla]] do not go far; for ''ex hypothesi'' that teacher  did not know who his father was, and the latter could quite well have been a Brahmin.<br><br>It may therefore be held that the priests and the nobles practised hereditary occupations, and that either class was a closed body into which a man must be born. These two Varṇas may thus be fairly regarded as castes. The Vaiśyas offer more difficulty, for they practised a great variety of occupations (see '''[[वैश्य|Vaiśya]]'''). Fick<ref name=fx143_ve2_950> ''Op. cit.,'' 19 ''et seq.;<br>'' 162 ''et seq.''</ref> concludes that there is no exact sense in which they can be called a caste, since, in the Buddhist literature, they were divided into various groups, which themselves practised endogamy such as the ''gahapatis,'' or smaller landowners, the ''setthis,'' or large merchants and members of the various guilds, while there are clear traces<ref name=fx144_ve2_950> Hopkins, ''The Mutual Relations of the Four Castes according to the Mānavadharmaśāstram,'' 78, 82 ''et seq.''</ref> in the legal textbooks of a view that [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] and [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] stand opposed to all the other members of the community. But we need hardly accept this view for Vedic times, when the [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]], the ordinary freeman of the tribe, formed a class or caste in all probability, which was severed by its free status from the Śūdras, and which was severed by its lack of priestly or noble blood from the two higher classes in the state. It is probably legitimate to hold that any [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] could marry any member of the caste, and that the later divisions within the category of Vaiśyas are growths of divisions parallel with the original process by which priest and noble had grown into separate entities. The process can be seen to day when new tribes fall under the caste system: each class tries to elevate itself in the social scale by refusing to intermarry with inferior classes on equal terms--hypergamy is often allowed--and so those Vaiśyas who acquired wealth in trade ('''[[श्रेष्ठिन्|Śreṣṭhin]]''') or agriculture (the Pāli Gahapatis) would become distinct, as sub-castes, from the ordinary Vaiśyas. But it is not legitimate to regard [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] as a theoretic caste; rather it is an old caste which is in process of dividing into innumerable sub-castes under influences of occupation, religion, or geographical situation.<br><br>Fick<ref name=fx145_ve2_950> ''Op. cit.,'' 202 ''et seq.''</ref> denies also that the Śūdras ever formed a single  caste: he regards the term as covering the numerous inferior races and tribes defeated by the Āryan invaders, but originally as denoting only one special tribe. It is reasonable to suppose that [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] was the name given by the Vedic Indians to the nations opposing them, and that these ranked as slaves beside the three castes--nobles, priests, and people--just as in the Anglo-Saxon and early German constitution beside the priests, the ''nobiles'' or eorls, and the ''ingenui,'' ordinary freemen or ceorls, there was a distinct class of slaves proper; the use of a generic expression to cover them seems natural, whatever its origin (see '''[[शूद्र|Śūdra]]'''). In the Āryan view a marriage of Śūdras could hardly be regulated by rules; any [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] could wed another, if such a marriage could be called a marriage at all, for a slave cannot in early law be deemed to be capable of marriage proper. But what applied in the early Vedic period became no doubt less and less applicable later when many aboriginal tribes and princes must have come into the Āryan community by peaceful means, or by conquest, without loss of personal liberty, and when the term [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] would cover many sorts of people who were not really slaves, but were freemen of a humble character occupied in such functions as supplying the numerous needs of the village, like the '''Caṇḍālas,''' or tribes living under Āryan control, or independent, such as the '''Niṣādas.'''<br><br>But it is also probable that the Śūdras came to include men of Āryan race, and that the Vedic period saw the degradation of Āryans to a lower social status. This seems, at any rate, to have been the case with the '''Rathakāras.''' In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx146_ve2_950> i. 1, 4, 8.</ref> the [[रथकार|Rathakāra]] is placed as a special class along with the Brāhmaṇas, Rājanyas, and Vaiśyas: this can hardly be interpreted except to mean that the Rathakāras were not included in the Āryan classes, though it is just possible that only a subdivision of the Vaiśyas is meant. There is other evidence<ref name=fx147_ve2_950> ''Cf.'' Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 1, 9, with the scholiast;<br> iv. 7, 7;<br> 9, 5;<br> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 10, 12, 13.</ref> that the Rathakāras were regarded as Śūdras. But in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx148_ve2_950> Av. iv. 5, 6. That the words ''[[कर्मार|karmāra]]'' and ''[[रथकार|rathakāra]]'' are here appellatives, as Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 17, 198. suggests, is quite impossible.</ref> the Rathakāras and the '''Karmāras''' appear in a position of importance in connexion with the  selection of the king; these two classes are also referred to in an honourable way in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā;<ref name=fx149_ve2_950> xxx. 6. 7. ''Cf.'' xiv. 27;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 2, 1 ([[रथकार|Rathakāra]]);<br> 3, 1 ([[कर्मार|Karmāra]]).</ref> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx150_ve2_950> xiii. 4, 2, 17.</ref> too, the [[रथकार|Rathakāra]] is mentioned as a a person of high standing. It is impossible to accept the view suggested by Fick<ref name=fx151_ve2_950> ''Op. cit.,'' 209, 210.</ref> that these classes were originally nonĀryan; we must recognize that the Rathakāras, in early Vedic times esteemed for their skill, later became degraded because of the growth of the feeling that manual labour was not dignified. The development of this idea was a departure from the Āryan conception; it is not unnatural, however undesirable, and has a faint parallel in the class distinctions of modern Europe. Similarly, the [[कर्मार|Karmāra]], the '''[[तक्षन्|Takṣan]],'''<ref name=fx152_ve2_950> The name is applied to [[बृबु|Bṛbu]] (Rv. vi. 45, 31) in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 11, 11. According to Brunnhofer, ''Iran und Turan,'' 127, the name is a people's name, but this is very unlikely. See Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 107.</ref> the Carmamna, or ‘tanner,’ the weaver and others, quite dignified occupations in the Rigveda, are reckoned as Śūdras in the Pāli texts.<ref name=fx153_ve2_950> Fick, ''op. cit.,'' 160, 210.</ref><br><br>The later theory, which appears fully developed in the [[धर्म|Dharma]] Sūtras,<ref name=fx154_ve2_950> [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv;<br> [[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xviii;<br> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 16. 17.</ref> deduces the several castes other than the original four from the intermarriage of the several castes. This theory has no justification in the early Vedic literature. In some cases it is obviously wrong; for example, the '''[[सूत|Sūta]]''' is said to be a caste of this kind, whereas it is perfectly clear that if the Sūtas did form a caste, it was one ultimately due to occupation. But there is no evidence at all that the Sūtas, Grāmaṇīs, and other members of occupations were real castes in the sense that they were endogamic in the early Vedic period. All that we can say is that there was a steady progress by which caste after caste was formed, occupation being an important determining feature, just as in modern times there are castes bearing names like Gopāla (‘cowherd’) [[कैवर्त|Kaivarta]] or Dhīvara (‘fisherman’), and [[वणिज्|Vaṇij]] (‘merchant’).<ref name=fx155_ve2_950> ''Cf.'' Jolly, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 50, 507 ''et seq.;<br>'' Bühler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 14, xxxviii, xxxix.</ref> <br><br>Fick<ref name=fx156_ve2_950> ''Op. cit.,'' 184 ''et seq.''</ref> finds in the Jātakas mention of a number of occupations whose members did not form part of any caste at all, such as the attendants on the court, the actors and dancers who went from village to village, and the wild tribes that lived in the mountains, fishermen, hunters, and so on. In Vedic times these people presumably fell under the conception of [[शूद्र|Śūdra]], and may have included the '''[[पर्णक|Parṇaka]], [[पौल्कस|Paulkasa]], [[बैन्द|Bainda]],''' who are mentioned with many others in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’). The slaves also, whom Fick<ref name=fx157_ve2_950> ''Ibid.,'' 197 ''et seq.''</ref> includes in the same category, were certainly included in the term [[शूद्र|Śūdra]].<br><br>5. ''Origin of the Castes.''--The question of the origin of the castes presents some difficulty. The ultimate cause of the extreme rigidity of the caste system, as compared with the features of any other Āryan society, must probably be sought in the sharp distinction drawn from the beginning between the Āryan and the [[शूद्र|Śūdra]]. The contrast which the Vedic Indians felt as existing between themselves and the conquered population, and which probably rested originally on the difference of colour between the upper and the lower classes, tended to accentuate the natural distinctions of birth, occupation, and locality which normally existed among the Āryan Indians, but which among other Āryan peoples never developed into a caste system like that of India. The doctrine of hypergamy which marks the practical working of the caste system, seems clearly to point to the feeling that the Āryan could marry the [[शूद्रा|Śūdrā]], but not the [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] the Āryā. This distinction probably lies at the back of all other divisions: its force may be illustrated by the peculiar state of feeling as to mixed marriages, for example, in the Southern States of America and in South Africa, or even in India itself, between the new invaders from Europe and the mingled population which now peoples the country. Marriages between persons of the white and the dark race are disapproved in principle, but varying degrees of condemnation attach to (1) the marriage of a man of the white race with a woman of the dark race;  (2) an informal connexion between these two; (3) a marriage between a woman of the white race and a man of the dark race; and (4) an informal connexion between these two. Each category, on the whole, is subject to more severe reprobation than the preceding one. This race element, it would seem, is what has converted social divisions into castes. There appears, then, to be a large element of truth in the theory, best represented by Risley,<ref name=fx158_ve2_950> Best stated and summed up in ''The Peoples of India.'' See also the summary in ''The Indian Empire,'' 1, chap. 6.</ref> which explains caste in the main as a matter of blood, and which holds that the higher the caste is, the greater is the proportion of Āryan blood.<br><br>The chief rival theory is undoubtedly that of Senart,<ref name=fx159_ve2_950> ''Les Castes dans l'Inde.''</ref> which places the greatest stress on the Āryan constitution of the family. According to Senart the Āryan people practised in affairs of marriage both a rule of exogamy, and one of endogamy. A man must marry a woman of equal birth, but not one of the same ''gens,'' according to Roman law as interpreted by Senart and Kovalevsky;<ref name=fx160_ve2_950> ''Famille et Propriété Primitives,'' 19, ''et seq. Cf.'' L. de la Vallée Poussin, ''Le Védisme,'' 15 ''et seq.,'' with ''Le Brahmanisme,'' 7.</ref> and an Athenian must marry an Athenian woman, but not one of the same . In India these rules are reproduced in the form that one must not marry within the '''[[गोत्र|Gotra]],''' but not without the caste. The theory, though attractively developed, is not convincing; the Latin and Greek parallels are not even probably accurate;<ref name=fx161_ve2_950> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 472.</ref> and in India the rule forbidding marriage within the [[गोत्र|Gotra]] is one which grows; in strictness as the evidence grows later in date.<ref name=fx162_ve2_950> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 74 ''et seq.''</ref><br><br>On the other hand, it is not necessary to deny that the development of caste may have been helped by the family traditions of some ''gentes,'' or , or Gotras. The Patricians of Rome for a long time declined intermarriage with the plebeians; the Athenian Eupatridai seem to have kept their pure from contamination by union with lower blood; and there may well have been noble families among the Vedic Indians who intermarried only among themselves. The  Germans known to Tacitus<ref name=fx163_ve2_950> ''Germania,'' 7, 13, etc.</ref> were divided into ''nobiles'' and ''ingenui,'' and the Anglo-Saxons into eorls and ceorls, noble and non-noble freemen.<ref name=fx164_ve2_950> Medley, ''English Constitutional History,''^2 21 ''et seq.,'' and authorities there cited. In the formation of a kingdom minor chiefs, once petty kings, would become nobles.</ref> The origin of nobility need not be sought in the Vedic period proper, for it may already have existed. It may have been due to the fact that the king, whom we must regard as originally elected by the people, was as king often in close relation with, or regarded as an incarnation of, the deity;<ref name=fx165_ve2_950> ''E.g.,'' Frazer, ''Early History of the Kingship'' and ''The Golden Bough'' (ed. 3), Part 1., ''The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings.'' The traces of this conception in Āryan peoples are clear--''e.g.,'' the ''rex sacrificulus'' in Rome, the sacred functions of the Archon Basileus in Athens;<br> ''cf.'' Ridgway, ''Origin of Tragedy,'' p. 29.</ref> and that hereditary kingship would tend to increase the tradition of especially sacred blood: thus the royal family and its offshoots would be anxious to maintain the purity of their blood. In India, beside the sanctity of the king, there was the sanctity of the priest. Here we have in the family exclusiveness of king and nobles, and the similar exclusiveness of a priesthood which was not celibate, influences that make for caste, especially when accompanying the deep opposition between the general folk and the servile aborigines.<br><br>Caste, once created, naturally developed in different directions. Nesfield<ref name=fx166_ve2_950> ''Brief View of the Caste System of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh,'' Allahabad, 1885.</ref> was inclined to see in occupation the one ground of caste. It is hardly necessary seriously to criticize this view considered as an ultimate explanation of caste, but it is perfectly certain that gilds of workers tend to become castes. The carpenters ('''[[तक्षन्|Takṣan]]'''), the chariot-makers ('''[[रथकार|Rathakāra]]'''), the fishermen ('''[[धैवर|Dhaivara]]''') and others are clearly of the type of caste, and the number extends itself as time goes on. But this is not to say that caste is founded on occupation pure and simple in its first origin, or that mere difference of occupation would have produced the system of caste without the interposition of the fundamental difference between Āryan and [[दास|Dāsa]] or [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] blood and colour. This difference rendered increasingly important what the history of the Āryan peoples shows us to be declining, the distinction between the noble and the non-noble  freemen, a distinction not of course ultimate, but one which seems to have been developed in the Āryan people before the separation of its various branches.<br><br>It is well known that the Iranian polity presents a division of classes comparable in some respects<ref name=fx167_ve2_950> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 243, 244.</ref> with the Indian polity. The priests (Atharvas) and warriors (Rathaesthas) are unmistakably parallel, and the two lower classes seem to correspond closely to the Pāli Gahapatis, and perhaps to the Śūdras.<ref name=fx168_ve2_950> Senart, ''op. cit.,'' 141.</ref> But they are certainly not castes in the Indian sense of the word. There is no probability in the view of Senart<ref name=fx169_ve2_950> ''Ibid.'' 140.</ref> or of Risley<ref name=fx170_ve2_950> ''Indian Empire,'' 1, 336-348.</ref> that the names of the old classes were later superimposed artificially on a system of castes that were different from them in origin. We cannot say that the castes existed before the classes, and that the classes were borrowed by India from Iran, as Risley maintains, ignoring the early [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] evidence for the four Varṇas, and treating the transfer as late. Nor can we say with Senart that the castes and classes are of independent origin. If there had been no [[वर्ण|Varṇa]], caste might never have arisen; both colour and class occupation are needed for a plausible account of the rise of caste.<ref name=fx171_ve2_950> The Indian theories of the origin of caste are merely religious or philosophical, and have no value. See for them, Rv. x. 90 (which is repeated in other Saṃhitās);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 1, 4 ''et seq.;<br> ibid.,'' iv. 3, 10, 1-3 = [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 5 = Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiv. 28-30;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 4, 3, 1 ''et seq.'' For the origin of the Brahmins, see Av. iv. 6, 1;<br> xv. 9, 1;<br> of the [[राजन्य|Rājanya]], Av. xv. 8, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 13, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' Muir, 12, 8 ''et seq.;<br>'' Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 217-220.<br><br>The most important collection of texts on caste are those of Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, and of Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, where practically all the data of the Brāhmaṇas are extracted;<br> there have to be added only the data of the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, which are merely confirmatory of those of the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] and [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitās, The Epic materials concerning caste are given by Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, who has also analyzed the caste relations of the Mānavadharmaśāstra in ''The Mutual Relation of the Four Castes according to the Mānavadharmaśāstram. Cf.'' also Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 212 ''et seq.;<br>'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 185 ''et seq.;<br>'' Senart, ''Les Castes dans l'Inde;<br>'' Barth, ''Revue de l'Histoire des Religions,'' 1894, 75 ''et seq.;<br>'' Jolly, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 50, 507 ''et seq.;<br>'' Oldenberg, ''ibid.,'' 51, 267-290, a valuable criticism of Senart's views;<br> von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 152 ''et seq.;<br>'' 425 ''et seq.;<br>'' Schlagintweit, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 33, 549;<br> Shridhar V. Katkar, ''History of Caste in India.'' The Jātaka evidence is all collected by Fick, ''Die sociale Gliederung im nordo7stlichen Indien zu Buddha's Zeit'' (1897);<br> its value is considerable, but its date is extremely doubtful, and it certainly cannot be regarded as really contemporary with Buddha (fifth century B.C.). The [[धर्म|Dharma]] Sūtras also give full details, but the¤ir date likewise is uncertain.</ref> 

वर्त
<u>'''Varta.'''</u> See '''[[वर्त्र|Vartra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वर्तनि
<u>'''Vartani'''</u> as a part of a chariot seems to denote the ‘felly’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_952> i. 53, 8;<br> vii. 69, 3;<br> viii. 63, 8.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_952> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 33, 2;<br> as part of the sacrificial Soma vehicle. [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 4, 9, 5;<br> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, etc.</ref>

वर्तिका
<u>'''Vartikā,'''</u> a ‘quail,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_953> i. 112, 18;<br> 116, 4;<br> 117, 16;<br> 118, 8;<br> x. 39, 13.</ref> as having been saved by the Aśvins from a wolf's jaws. It is also included in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the Yajurvedas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_953> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 11, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 20, 30;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 1.<br><br>As to the form of the word, ''cf.'' Vārttika on Pāṇini, vii. 3, 45 where it is said to be ‘northern,’ as opposed to the eastern Vartakā. ''Cf.'' also Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 45, n.;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 90</ref>

वर्त्र
<u>'''Vartra'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_954> i. 3, 7.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_954> i. 6, 8, 1.</ref> denote the ‘dam’ of a tank. In the former passage the commentator and some manuscripts have [[वर्त|Varta]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_954> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 4.</ref>

वर्ध्र
<u>'''Vardhra'''</u> denotes a ‘thong’ or ‘strap’ with which a woven couch is fastened. It is mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_955> xiv. 1, 60, where the Paippalāda recension has ''varadhrā.''</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_955> v. 4, 4, 1.</ref>

वर्मन्
<u>'''Varman'''</u> denotes ‘body armour,’ ‘coat of mail,’ ‘corselet,’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_956> i. 31, 15;<br> 140, 10;<br> vi. 75, 1. 8. 18. 19;<br> viii. 47, 8;<br> x. 107, 7, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_956> Atharvaveda, viii. 5, 7 ''et seq.;<br>'' ix. 5, 26;<br> xvii. 1, 27, etc.</ref> Of what material it was made is  uncertain; there are references to sewing (''syūta'')<ref name=fx3_ve2_956> Rv. i. 31, 15;<br> x. 101, 8.</ref> which may be reckoned in favour of the use of linen corselets such as those recorded by Herodotus,<ref name=fx4_ve2_956> ''Cf.'' Hehn, ''Kulturpflanzen,''^6 167 ''et seq.;<br>'' Lang, ''Homer and his Age,'' 150 ''et seq.''</ref> but there is a later reference<ref name=fx5_ve2_956> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 298;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 222;<br> von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 34.</ref> to corselets of '''Ayas, Loha,''' or '''[[रजत|Rajata]],''' on which it is doubtful whether much stress can be laid. They may, however, have been either of metal or of leather covered with metal.

वर्ष
<u>'''Varṣa'''</u> denotes primarily ‘rain,’<ref name=fx1_ve2_957> Neuter: Rv. v. 58, 7;<br> 83, 10;<br> Av. iii. 27, 6;<br> iv. 15, 2, etc.</ref> then ‘rainy season’<ref name=fx2_ve2_957> Feminine plural;<br> Av. vi. 55, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 2, 3;<br> ii. 6, 1, 1;<br> v. 6, 10, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 12, etc.</ref> and ‘year.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_957> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 17, 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 9, 3, 19, etc.</ref>

वलग
<u>'''Valaga'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_958> v. 31, 4;<br> x. 1, 18;<br> xix. 9, 9.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_958> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 3, 2, 1 (where see Sāyaṇa's note);<br> vi. 2, 11, 1. 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ii. 11;<br> xxv. 9;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, v. 23;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 4, 2.</ref> seems to denote a ‘secret spell.’

वल्क
<u>'''Valka'''</u> in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_959> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 3, 5;<br> iii. 7, 4, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 7. 6.</ref> denotes ‘bark’ of a tree.

वल्मीक
<u>'''Valmīka'''</u> denotes an ‘ant-hill’ in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_960> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 1, 3, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xix. 2;<br> xxxi. 12;<br> xxxv. 19;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxv. 8.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_960> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 2, 17;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 4, 10;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 3, 4.</ref>

वल्श
<u>'''Valśa'''</u> denotes ‘twig,’<ref name=fx1_ve2_961> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 3, 9, 1.</ref> usually in the compounds ''śata-[[वल्श|valśa]],'' ‘having a hundred twigs,’<ref name=fx2_ve2_961> Rv. iii. 8, 11;<br> Av. vi. 30, 2, etc.</ref> or ''sahasra-[[वल्श|valśa]],'' ‘having a thousand twigs,’<ref name=fx3_ve2_961> Rv. iii. 8, 11;<br> vii. 33, 9, etc.</ref> which is applied metaphorically of ‘offspring.’<ref name=fx4_ve2_961> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 3, 5, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, iii. 2, etc.</ref> 

वश अश्व्य
<u>'''1. Vaśa Aśvya'''</u> is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_962> i. 112, 10;<br> 116, 21;<br> viii. 8, 20;<br> 24, 14;<br> 46, 21. 23;<br> 50, 9;<br> x. 40, 7.</ref> of a protégé of the Aśvins. He is also mentioned in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_962> xvi. 11, 13.</ref> as having received bounty from '''[[पृथुश्रवस्|Pṛthuśravas]] [[कानीत|Kānīta]].''' He is the reputed author of a Rigvedic hymn,<ref name=fx3_ve2_962> viii. 46.</ref> which is repeatedly referred to by his name [[वश|Vaśa]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_962> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 6, 2, 3;<br> ix. 3, 3, 19;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 5, 1, 2;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 10. 11.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 38, 39.</ref> ''Cf.'' also '''[[व्य्अश्व|Vyaśva]].'''

वश
<u>'''2. Vaśa,'''</u> plur., is the name of a tribe mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_963> viii. 14, 3.</ref> as being in '''[[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]]''' along with the '''Kurus,''' the '''Pañcālas,''' and the '''Uśīnaras.''' They are also connected with the '''Matsyas''' according to the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_963> iv. 1 (reading ''sa-[[वश|Vaśa]]-Matsyeṣu'' for the ''savasan-Matsyeṣu'' of the manuscripts, which is otherwise emended to ''SatvanMatsyeṣu,'' Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 36, n. 2;<br> ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 367).</ref> The Vaśas and Uśīnaras are spoken of as united in the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]:<ref name=fx3_ve2_963> i. 2, 9, where the text has ''[[शवस|Śavasa]]-Uśīnareṣu,'' which is nonsense. ''Cf. Sa-[[वश|Vaśa]]-Uśīnarāṇām'' in [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 14, 3. and n. 2.</ref> the names<ref name=fx4_ve2_963> As both derived from the root ''vaś,'' ‘desire.’<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 393, n.;<br> 407, n.</ref> seem to indicate that the Vaśas and Uśīnaras were connected.

वशा
<u>'''Vaśā'''</u> denotes ‘cow’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_964> ii. 7, 5;<br> vi. 63, 9;<br> x. 91, 14, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_964> Av. iv. 24, 4;<br> x. 10, 2;<br> xii. 4, 1, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 4, 4. 5;<br> iii. 4, 2, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiii. 4, etc.</ref> According to the commentators, the word means a ‘barren cow,’ but this is not a necessary sense except in a few passages.<ref name=fx3_ve2_964> Av. vii. 113, 2, where the '''[[परिवृक्ता|Parivṛktā]],''' ‘rejected wife,’ is compared with a [[वशा|Vaśā]]. In xii. 4 (where ''[[वशा|vaśā]]'' alternates with ''go'') there is no indication that [[वशा|Vaśā]] means a barren cow, except perhaps in verse 16, on which ''cf.'' Bloomfield. ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 656, 658. The Brahmins there claim as their own a barren cow. A ''[[सूत-वशा|sūta-vaśā]]--i.e.,'' a cow barren after once calving--is mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 5, 4. etc. In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 2, 2, and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2. 5, 2, used with '''Avi,''' Sūtā denotes a ‘mother sheep,’ ‘ewe.’</ref> 

वसति
<u>'''Vasati'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_965> i. 31, 15;<br> v. 2, 6.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_965> Vājasaneyī¤ Saṃhitā, xviii. 15;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 3, 5, 4;<br> iii. 7, 3, 3, etc.</ref> ‘abode,’ ‘house.’

वसन
<u>'''Vasana'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_966> i. 95, 7.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_966> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 8, 5;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 15;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], viii. 9, etc.</ref> denotes ‘dress.’

वसन्त
<u>'''Vasanta,'''</u> ‘spring,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_967> x. 90, 6;<br> 161, 4.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_967> Av. vi. 55, 2;<br> viii. 2, 22;<br> xii. 1, 36, etc.</ref> It is regularly identified with the first of the months. See '''[[ऋतु|Ṛtu]].'''

वसावि
<u>'''Vasāvi'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_968> x. 73, 4.</ref> denotes, according to Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve2_968> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> a ‘treasure house.’

वसिष्ठ
<u>'''Vasiṣṭha'''</u> is the name of one of the most prominent priestly figures of Vedic tradition. The seventh Maṇḍala of the Rigveda is ascribed to him; this ascription is borne out by the fact that the Vasiṣṭhas<ref name=fx1_ve2_969> Rv. vii. 7, 7;<br> 12, 3;<br> 23, 6;<br> 33, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' 37, 4;<br> 39, 7;<br> 40, 7;<br> 76, 6. 7;<br> 77, 6;<br> 80, 1;<br> 90, 7;<br> 91, 7;<br> x. 15, 8;<br> 66, 14;<br> 122, 8.</ref> and [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_969> Rv. vii. 9, 6;<br> 13, 4. 21;<br> 22, 3;<br> 23, 1;<br> 26, 5;<br> 33, 11 ''et seq.;<br>'' 42, 6;<br> 59, 3;<br> 70, 6;<br> 73, 3;<br> 86, 5;<br> 88, 1;<br> 95, 6;<br> 96, 1;<br> x. 65, 15;<br> 150, 5;<br> i. 112, 9.</ref> are frequently mentioned in that Maṇḍala, besides being sometimes referred to elsewhere. That by the name [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] a definite individual is always meant is most improbable, as Oldenberg<ref name=fx3_ve2_969> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 204 ''et seq. Cf.'' vii. 23, 1 (singular) with verse 6 (plural).</ref> shows; [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] must normally mean simply ‘a [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]].’ But it is not necessary to deny that a real [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] existed, for one hymn<ref name=fx4_ve2_969> Rv. vii. 18. As to vii. 33, Oldenberg and Geldner differ. See ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 130. But it is rather doubtful whether it can possibly be said to be as early as vii. 18, or to have any claim to be really an utterance of [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]].</ref> seems to show clear traces of his authorship, and of his assistance to '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]]''' against the ten kings.<br><br>The most important feature of Vasiṣṭha's life was apparently  his hostility to '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]].''' The latter was certainly<ref name=fx5_ve2_969> See Rv. iii. 33. 53;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 328 ''et seq.''</ref> at one time the '''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]]''' (‘domestic priest’) of [[सुदास्|Sudās]], but he seems to have been deposed from that post, to have joined Sudās' enemies, and to have taken part in the onslaught of the kings against him, for the hymn of Sudās' triumph<ref name=fx4_ve2_969/> has clear references to the ruin [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] brought on his allies.<ref name=fx6_ve2_969> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 260 ''et seq.''</ref> Oldenberg,<ref name=fx7_ve2_969> ''Op. cit.,'' 204, n. 3.</ref> however, holds that the strife of [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] and [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] is not to be found in the Rigveda. On the other hand, Geldner<ref name=fx8_ve2_969> ''Op. cit.,'' 2, 158 ''et seq.''</ref> is hardly right in finding in the Rigveda<ref name=fx9_ve2_969> iii. 53, 15. 16. 21-24, the last four verses being the famous ''Vasiṣṭhadveṣiṇyaḥ,'' which [[दुर्ग|Durga]], the commentator on the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], declines to explain, because he was a Kāpiṣṭhala [[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]] (see Muir, ''op. cit.,'' 12, 344;<br> Bṛhaddevatā, iv. 117 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes). What the verses really mean is not at all certain. See Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 254 ''et seq.''</ref> a compressed account indicating the rivalry of '''[[शक्ति|Śakti]],''' Vasiṣṭha's son, with [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]], the acquisition by [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] of special skill in speech, and the revenge of [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]], who secured the death of [[शक्ति|Śakti]] by Sudās' servants, an account which is more fully related by Ṣaḍguruśiṣya,<ref name=fx10_ve2_969> ''Cf.'' Sāyaṇa on Rv. vii. 32, and Macdonell's edition of the Sarvānukramaṇī, 107;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 119.</ref> which appeared in the Śāṭyāyanaka,<ref name=fx11_ve2_969> See the note in the Anukramaṇī on vii. 32, where both the Tāṇḍaka and the Śāṭyāyanaka are quoted (Muir, ''op. cit.,'' 12, 328).</ref> and to which reference seems to be made in the brief notices of the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx12_ve2_969> vii. 4, 7, 1. In iii. 1, 7, 3;<br> v. 4, 11, 3, also [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] is a foe of [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]].</ref> and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx13_ve2_969> iv. 7, 3;<br> viii. 2, 3;<br> xix. 3, 8;<br> xxi. 11, 2. The story is alluded to in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 8, and in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 150;<br> iii. 26. 83. 149. 204. In ii. 390 it is definitely stated, as in the Śāṭyāyanaka (n. 10), that [[शक्ति|Śakti]] was cast into the fire by the Saudāsas.</ref> regarding Vasiṣṭha's sons having been slain, and his overcoming the Saudāsas. But it is important to note that no mention is made in these authorities of [[सुदास्|Sudās]] himself being actually opposed to [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]], while in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx14_ve2_969> vii. 34, 9;<br> viii. 21, 11. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 11, 14.</ref> [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] appears as the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] and consecrator of [[सुदास्|Sudās]] [[पैजवन|Paijavana]]. [[यास्क|Yāska]]<ref name=fx15_ve2_969> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 24;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxvi. 12, 13.</ref> recognizes [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] as the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of [[सुदास्|Sudās]]; this accords with what seems to have been the fact  that [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] originally held the post. Probably, however, with the disappearance of [[सुदास्|Sudās]], [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] recovered his position, whereupon [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] in revenge for the murder of his sons secured in some way unspecified the defeat of the Saudāsas.<ref name=fx16_ve2_969> Roth, ''Zur Litteratur und Geschichte des Weda,'' 121 ''et seq.,'' considered that the Vasiṣṭhas were finally successful in the effort to remove the Viśvāmitras from favour. Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 120;<br> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 34, doubted this, and Muir, ''op. cit.,'' 12, 371-375, held the problem to be insoluble. Roth and Muir, however, both complicated the question by regarding the Bharatas as enemies of the Tṛtsus, which (see '''[[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]]''') is not at all probable, though it is still the view of Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 41, 42.</ref><br><br>At any rate it is hardly necessary to suppose that the enmity of the Saudāsas and Vasiṣṭhas was permanent. There is evidence<ref name=fx17_ve2_969> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xv. 4, 24;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 34.</ref> that the Bharatas had the Vasiṣṭhas as Purohitas, while other versions<ref name=fx18_ve2_969> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 5, 2, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 17.</ref> regard them as Purohitas for people (''prajāḥ'') generally. It seems that the Vasiṣṭhas were pioneers in adopting the rule that Purohitas should act as [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] priest<ref name=fx19_ve2_969> [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] was [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] at the sacrifice of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]],''' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 16;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 21, 4.</ref> at the sacrifice: the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx20_ve2_969> xii. 6, 1, 41. ''Cf.'' iv. 6, 6, 5.</ref> states that the Vasiṣṭhas were once the only priests to act as Brahmans, but that later any priest could serve as such.<ref name=fx21_ve2_969> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 35.</ref> A rivalry with Jamadgni and [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] is reported in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx22_ve2_969> iii. 1, 7, 3. ''Cf.'' n. 11.</ref> [[पराशर|Parāśara]] and [[शतयातु|Śatayātu]] are associated with [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx23_ve2_969> vii. 18, 21.</ref> being apparently, as Geldner<ref name=fx24_ve2_969> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 132.</ref> thinks, the grandson and a son of [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]]. According to Pischel,<ref name=fx25_ve2_969> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 55 ''et seq.''</ref> in another hymn,<ref name=fx26_ve2_969> vii. 55. Aufrecht, ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 337, took the hymn to refer to a lover's visit to a maiden. ''Cf.'' Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 370;<br> Bṛhaddevatā, vi. 11, with Macdonell's notes.</ref> [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] appears as attempting to steal the goods of his father Varuṇa; Geldner<ref name=fx27_ve2_969> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 138. So also [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 13;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 231, n. 97;<br> Bṛhaddevatā, v. 150. 151.</ref> also shows that the Rigveda<ref name=fx28_ve2_969> vii. 33, 11.</ref> contains a clear reference to Vasiṣṭha's being a son of Varuṇa and the nymph Urvaśī. Perhaps this explains the fact that the Vasiṣṭhas are called the '''Tṛtsus''' in one passage  of the Rigveda;<ref name=fx29_ve2_969> vii. 83, 8.</ref> for being of miraculous parentage, [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] would need adoption into a [[गोत्र|Gotra]], that of the princes whom he served, and to whom [[अगस्त्य|Agastya]] seems to have introduced him.<br><br>There are numerous other references to [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] as a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in Vedic literature,<ref name=fx30_ve2_969> Rv. i. 112, 9;<br> vii. 88, 4;<br> 96, 3;<br> x. 95, 17;<br> 181, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvi. 19;<br> xx. 9;<br> xxxii. 2 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 478);<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 4, 12;<br> ii. 7, 9;<br> iv. 2, 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 10, 5;<br> Av. iv. 29, 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 18, 3;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxvi. 14;<br> xxix. 2. 3;<br> xxx. 3;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 13;<br> 15, 2;<br> 18, 6;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 2, 2;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 2, 4, etc.</ref> in the Sūtras,<ref name=fx31_ve2_969> See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 89-92;<br> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 35.</ref> and in the Epic, where he and [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] fight out their rivalry.<ref name=fx32_ve2_969> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 12, 375-414.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 131 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 31-34;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 31, 37, 53, 79, 123, 162;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 204-207.</ref>

वसु
<u>'''Vasu'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_970> iv. 17, 11. 13;<br> 20, 8;<br> vi. 55, 3;<br> viii. 13, 22, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_970> Av. vii. 115, 2;<br> ix. 4, 3;<br> x. 8, 20;<br> xiv. 2, 8, etc.</ref> denotes ‘wealth,’ ‘property.’

वसुक्र
<u>'''Vasukra'''</u> and his wife are the reputed composers of certain hymns of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_971> x. 27-29.</ref> The ascription goes back to the Rigveda Āraṇyakas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_971> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 2, 2;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, i. 3.</ref>

वसु-रोचिस्
<u>'''Vasu-rocis'''</u> is a name occurring only once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_972> viii. 34, 16.</ref> in a form which may be interpreted as either plural or singular. In the former alternative it denotes a family of singers;<ref name=fx2_ve2_972> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 162.</ref> in the latter a patron.<ref name=fx3_ve2_972> Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 175, n.</ref>

वस्तु
<u>'''Vastu'''</u> as a designation of time is the ‘early morning’ in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_973> i. 79, 6;<br> 104, 1;<br> 179, 1, etc. So Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxviii. 12. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 361.</ref> 

वस्त्र
<u>'''Vastra'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_974> i. 26, 1;<br> 134, 4;<br> iii. 39, 2;<br> v. 29, 15, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_974> Av. v. 1, 3;<br> ix. 5. 25;<br> xii. 3, 21, etc.</ref> denotes ‘dress,’ ‘clothing.’ See '''Yāsas.'''

वस्न
<u>'''Vasna'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_975> iv. 24, 9. where the phrase ''bhūyasā vasnam acarat kanīyaḥ'' must mean ‘with a greater price he obtained a lesser value.’ For the exact sense, ''cf.'' Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 419, 420.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_975> Av. xii. 2, 36 (‘price’) = Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 49 = [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 4, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ix. 5;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 10, 2, where the sense seems to be ‘let us barter food and drink like wares.’ ''Cf.'' also ''vasnikā,'' ‘worth a price,’ in [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 3, 13.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 247;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 382.</ref> denotes the ‘price’ paid for anything or its ‘value,’ or the thing itself as an object of purchase, ‘ware.’

वहतु
<u>'''Vahatu'''</u> is the regular name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_976> i. 184, 3;<br> iv. 58, 9;<br> x. 17, 1 (= Av. iii. 31, 5);<br> 32, 3;<br> 85, 13 ''et seq.''</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_976> Av. x. 1, 1;<br> xiv. 2, 9, 12, 66, 73;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 7, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 1, 2.</ref> for the ceremonial conducting of the bride from the house of her parents to that of her husband.

वह्नि
<u>'''Vahni,'''</u> ‘carrier,’ denotes any draught animal--''e.g.,'' a ‘horse,’<ref name=fx1_ve2_977> Rv. ii. 24, 13;<br> 37, 3;<br> iii. 6, 2, etc.</ref> a ‘goat,’<ref name=fx2_ve2_977> Rv. vi. 57, 3.</ref> or an ‘ox.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_977> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 2, 5, etc.</ref>

वह्य
<u>'''Vahya'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_978> vii. 55, 8.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_978> iv. 5, 3;<br> 20, 3;<br> xiv. 2, 30.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 154.</ref> a ‘couch’ or ‘bed’ of a comfortable kind used by women.

वाको-वाक्य
<u>'''Vāko-vākya,'''</u> ‘dialogue,’ is the name given in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_979> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 6, 9, 20;<br> xi. 5, 6, 8;<br> 7, 5;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vii. 1, 2, 4;<br> 2, 1;<br> 7, 1.</ref> to certain portions of the Vedic texts. In one place<ref name=fx2_ve2_979> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 6, 9, 20.</ref> the '''[[ब्रह्मोद्य|Brahmodya]]''' is said to be a dialogue; very probably in all the passages the [[ब्रह्मोद्य|Brahmodya]] is meant by this term. Geldner's  view<ref name=fx3_ve2_979> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 291.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 267;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 98, n. 3. It is certain that ‘logic’ is not meant, though Max Müller so renders it in his translation of the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].</ref> is different: he sees in the [[वाकोवाक्य|Vākovākya]] an essential part of the '''[[इतिहास|Itihāsa]]-[[पुराण|Purāṇa]],''' the dialogue or dramatic element as opposed to the narrative portion.

वाच्
<u>'''Vāc,'''</u> ‘speech,’ plays a great part in Vedic speculation, but only a few points are of other than mythological significance. Speech is in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_980> iv. 1, 3, 16. There are quite different accounts in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiv. 5;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 11, 5. Oldenberg finds traces of the origin of the legend in Rv. viii. 100;<br> but see v. Schroeder, ''Mysterium und Mimus,'' 339 ''et seq.;<br>'' Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1911, 993 ''et seq.''</ref> divided into four kinds-that of men, of animals, of birds (''vayāṃsi''), and of small creeping things (''kṣudraṃ sarīsṛpam''). The discrimination or making articulate of speech is ascribed to Indra by the Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx2_ve2_980> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 4, 7, 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 8.</ref> The ‘speech’ of the following musical instruments-'''[[तूणव|Tūṇava]], [[वीणा|Vīṇā]], [[दुन्दुभि|Dundubhi]]'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_980> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 5, 1013;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 4, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 6, 8;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiii. 4.</ref> --is mentioned, and in one Saṃhitā<ref name=fx4_ve2_980> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> also that of the axle of a chariot. The speech of the '''Kuru-Pañcālas''' was especially renowned,<ref name=fx5_ve2_980> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 3, 15. The difficult phrase has caused some doubt as to the sense, for ''uttarāhi vāg vadati Kurupañcālatrā'' seems to mean ‘speech in the north among the KuruPañcālas,’ this version being slightly supported by the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the passage quoted by Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xlii. n. 1. That recension, however, is not merely obscure, but it seems to couple the Kurus with the northern '''Mahāvṛṣas''' (so we must emend ''Mahāviṣeṣu''), and it cannot be relied on. Eggeling's attempt to remove the difficulty by taking ''uttarāhi'' as ‘higher’ in tone is not satisfactory. The most probable solution is that of Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 191, who takes ''Kurupañcālatrā'' to be ‘as among the Kuru-Pañcālas,’ which gives a good sense, especially when it is remembered that the northerners were probably the '''Uttara-Kurus''' in Kaśmīr, which seems to have been a home of Sanskrit (''cf.'' Franke, ''Pāli und Sanskrit,'' 89).</ref> as well as that of the northern country, according to the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx6_ve2_980> vii. 6.</ref> so that men went there to study the language. On the other hand, barbarisms in speech were known, and were to be avoided.<ref name=fx7_ve2_980> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 1, 23. 24, where the Asuras are described as saying ''he 'lavaḥ,'' perhaps for ''he 'rayaḥ'' But the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] version is different See Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East'' 26, 31, n. 3.</ref> <br><br>One division of speech referred to<ref name=fx8_ve2_980> See [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiv. 5;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 11, 5 (where the words ''yaś ca veda vaś ca na'' replace the ordinary distinction of ''daivī'' and ''mānuṣī:'' perhaps ''vedo'' should be read);<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 2, 1, 34;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 18, 13;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 3, 1;<br> a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] in [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], xiii. 9, etc.</ref> is that of the divine (''daivī'') and the human (''mānuṣī''), of which some specimens are given, such as ''om,'' the divine counterpart of ''tathā,'' and so forth. The Brahmin is said to know both;<ref name=fx9_ve2_980> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.,'' etc.</ref> it seems best to regard the distinction not as between Sanskrit and Apabhraṃśa, as Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx10_ve2_980> See Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 200, n.</ref> suggests, but as between the Sanskrit of the ritual and the hymns and that of ordinary life.<br><br>Reference is also made to Āryan<ref name=fx11_ve2_980> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 5;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, viii. 9.</ref> and to Brahmin<ref name=fx12_ve2_980> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 5, 2.</ref> speech, by which Sanskrit, as opposed to non-Āryan tongues, seems to be meant. The '''Vrātyas''' are described as speaking the language of the initiated (''dīkṣita-[[वाच्|vāc]]''), though not themselves initiated (''a-dīkṣita''), but as calling that which is easy to utter (''a-durukta''), difficult to utter.<ref name=fx13_ve2_980> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 1, 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Lévi, ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 34, 35;<br> Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 175-180;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 179, 180;<br> 196.</ref> This may mean that the non-Brahminical Indians were advancing more rapidly than the Brahminical tribes to Prākrit speech, especially if it is legitimate to connect the Vrātyas with the barbarians in speech alluded to in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx7_ve2_980/>

वाचक्नवी
<u>'''Vācaknavī,'''</u> ‘descendant of Vacaknu,’ is the patronymic of a woman with the further patronymic of '''Gārgī,''' who appears as a student of '''[[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]]''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_981> iii. 6, 1;<br> 8, 1. ''Cf.'' Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 10;<br> Atharvaveda Parisiṣṭa, xliii. 4, 23.</ref>

वाज
<u>'''Vāja'''</u> from the meaning of ‘strength,’ ‘speed,’ in its application to horses derives the sense of ‘race’<ref name=fx1_ve2_982> Rv. ii. 23, 13;<br> iii. 11, 9;<br> 37, 6;<br> 42, 6;<br> v. 35, 1;<br> 86, 2, etc.</ref> and ‘prize,’<ref name=fx2_ve2_982> Rv. i. 64, 13;<br> ii. 26, 3;<br> 31, 7;<br> iii. 2, 3;<br> viii. 103, 5, etc.</ref> or  merely ‘prosperity.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_982> Rv. i. 27, 5;<br> 92, 7;<br> vi. 45, 21. 23, etc.;<br> Av. xiii. 1, 22;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xviii. 7, 1. 12.</ref> That it ever means ‘horse’ is most improbable, that sense being given by '''[[वाजिन्|Vājin]].'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_982> See Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 10 ''et seq.,'' where he explains otherwise all the passages cited for the sense by the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 8.</ref>

वाजपेय
<u>'''Vājapeya'''</u> is the name of a ceremony which, according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_983> v. 1, 5, 2. 3.</ref> and later authorities,<ref name=fx2_ve2_983> See Weber, ''Über den [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]];<br>'' Hillebrandt, ''Rituallitteratur,'' 147 ''et seq.''</ref> is only performed by a Brahmin or a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]. The same [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_983> v. 1, 1, 13;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 1, 1, 2.</ref> insists that this sacrifice is superior to the '''[[राजसूय|Rājasūya]],''' but the consensus of other authorities<ref name=fx4_ve2_983> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 6, 2, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 6, 1;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 9, 19;<br> Lāṭyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 11, 1, etc.</ref> assigns to it merely the place of a preliminary to the '''[[बृहस्पतिसव|Bṛhaspatisava]]''' in the case of a priest, and to the '''[[राजसूय|Rājasūya]]''' in the case of a king, while the Śatapatha<ref name=fx5_ve2_983> v. 2, 1, 2. ''Cf.'' Kātyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiv. 1, 2.</ref> is compelled to identify the [[बृहस्पतिसव|Bṛhaspatisava]] with the [[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]]. The essential ceremony is a chariot race in which the sacrificer is victorious. There is evidence in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx6_ve2_983> xv. 1. See Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 41 ''et seq.''</ref> showing that once the festival was one which any Āryan could perform. Hillebrandt,<ref name=fx7_ve2_983> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 247.</ref> indeed, goes so far as to compare it with the Olympic games; but there is hardly much real ground for this: the rite seems to have been developed round a primitive habit of chariot racing, transformed into a ceremony which by sympathetic magic secures the success of the sacrificer. In fact<ref name=fx8_ve2_983> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, xxiv, xxv.</ref> Eggeling seems correct in holding that the [[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]] was a preliminary rite performed by a Brahmin prior to his formal installation as a [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], or by a king prior to his consecration. The Kuru [[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]] was specially well known.<ref name=fx9_ve2_983> Sāṅkhāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 3, 14 ''et seq.;<br>'' Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xviii. 3, 7.</ref>

वाज-बन्धु
<u>'''Vāja-bandhu'''</u> in one verse of the Rigveda (viii. 68, 19) may be a proper name. It may, however, merely be an adjective meaning ‘ally in conflict.’ <br>==Foot Notes==

वाज-रत्नायन
<u>'''Vāja-ratnāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Vājaratna,’ is the patronymic of '''Somaśuṣman''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 21, 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

वाज-श्रवस्
<u>'''Vāja-śravas'''</u> is mentioned in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_986> vi. 4, 33 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 5, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> as a pupil of '''[[जिह्वावन्त् बाध्योग|Jihvāvant Bādhyoga]].'''

वाज-श्रवस
<u>'''Vāja-śravasa,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[वाजश्रवस्|Vājaśravas]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''Kuśri''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_987> x. 5, 5, 1.</ref> It is also the patronymic of the father of '''[[नचिकेतस्|Naciketas]]''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_987> iii. 11, 8, 1. ''Cf.'' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 1, with different names, on which see Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 157, n.</ref> where the name is apparently Uśant, though it is understood by Sāyaṇa as a participle in the sense of ‘desiring.’ The Vājaśravases are in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] said to have been sages.<ref name=fx3_ve2_987> i. 3, 10, 3.</ref> They were '''Gotamas.'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_987> ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 11, 8.</ref>

वाजसनेय
<u>'''Vājasaneya'''</u> is the patronymic of '''[[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]]''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_988> vi. 3, 15;<br> 4, 33 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 3, 7;<br> 5, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> and the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_988> ii. 76 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 238).</ref> His school, the Vājasaneyins, are mentioned in the Sūtras.<ref name=fx3_ve2_988> Anupada [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vii. 12;<br> viii. 1. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 44, 53, 83, 283;<br> 2, 9;<br> 4, 140, 257, 309;<br> 10, 37, 76, 393, etc.</ref>

वाजिन्
<u>'''Vājin'''</u> in several passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_989> ii. 5, 1;<br> 10, 1;<br> 34, 7;<br> iii. 53, 23;<br> vi. 75, 6;<br> x. 103, 10, etc.</ref> denotes ‘steed’ with reference to its swiftness and strength. In one passage<ref name=fx2_ve2_989> x. 56, 2.</ref> it is perhaps, as Ludwig<ref name=fx3_ve2_989> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 133.</ref> thinks, a proper name, that of a son of '''[[बृहद्उक्थ|Bṛhaduktha]],''' but this view seems forced.

वाजिन
<u>'''Vājina'''</u> in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_990> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 3, 10;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 21. 23.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_990> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 4, 21;<br> iii. 3, 3, 2;<br> ix. 5, 1, 57, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 381, n. 2;<br> Garbe, Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 3, 445, calls it ‘whey.’</ref> denotes a mixture of hot fresh milk with sour milk. 

वाज्य
<u>'''Vājya,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[वाज|Vāja]],’ is the patronymic of '''Ketu''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_991> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372, 383.</ref>

वाडेयी-पुत्र
<u>'''Vāḍeyī-putra.'''</u> See '''[[बाडेयीपुत्र|Bāḍeyīputra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वाण
<u>'''Vāṇa'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_993> i. 85, 10;<br> viii. 20, 8;<br> ix. 97, 8;<br> x. 32, 4. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 67.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_993> x. 2, 17.</ref> denotes ‘instrumental music’ according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary; but in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx3_ve2_993> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 9, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 5.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx4_ve2_993> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], v. 6, 12;<br> xiv. 7, 8;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 1, 4, etc.</ref> a ‘harp’ or ‘lyre’ with a hundred strings (''śata-[[तन्तु|tantu]]''), used at the Mahāvrata ceremony. The Rigveda<ref name=fx5_ve2_993> x. 32, 4.</ref> clearly refers to the seven ‘notes’ (''dhātu'') of the instrument, which are called elsewhere<ref name=fx6_ve2_993> i. 164, 24;<br> iii. 1, 6;<br> 7, 1;<br> ix. 103, 3, etc.</ref> the seven Vāṇīs, unless the latter expression be taken as referring to the metres.<ref name=fx7_ve2_993> Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' 64.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 289, who thinks the meaning is ‘flute’ in Rv. i. 85, 10, but not necessarily. Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 138, render it ‘voice’ in i. 85, 10;<br> ix. 97, 8, and ‘arrow’ in viii. 20, 8;<br> ix. 50, 1, and this sense is accepted in Bo7htlingk's Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 1 ''[[वाण|vāṇa]]'' for ix. 50, 1.</ref>

वाणिज
<u>'''Vāṇija'''</u> denotes a ‘merchant’ as a hereditary profession (‘son of a '''[[वणिज्|Vaṇij]]'''’) in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_994> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 17;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 14, 1.</ref>

वाणी
<u>'''Vāṇī.'''</u> See '''[[वाण|Vāṇa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वाणीची
<u>'''Vāṇīcī'''</u> occurs in a verse of the Rigveda (v. 75, 4), where the St. Petersburg Dictionary ascribes to it the sense of ‘musical instrument.’ <br>==Foot Notes==

वात
<u>'''Vāta'''</u> is the regular word for ‘wind’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_997> i. 28, 6;<br> ii. 1, 6;<br> 38, 3;<br> iii. 14, 3, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_997> Av. iv. 5, 2;<br> v. 5, 7;<br> xii. 1, 51, etc.</ref> Five winds are mentioned.<ref name=fx3_ve2_997> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6;<br> 1, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxii. 6.</ref> In one passage<ref name=fx4_ve2_997> Rv. v. 53, 8.</ref> Zimmer<ref name=fx5_ve2_997> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 45, who compares also Rv. x. 137, 2, which refers to two winds.</ref> sees a reference to the north-east monsoon. ''Cf.'' '''[[सलिलवात|Salilavāta]].'''

वात-पान
<u>'''Vāta-pāna'''</u> (‘wind guard’) apparently means some sort of garment as protecting against wind in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (vi. 1, 1, 3).<br>==Foot Notes==

वात-रशन
<u>'''Vāta-raśana,'''</u> ‘wind-girt,’ is applied to the '''Munis''' in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_999> x. 136, 2.</ref> and to the [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]] in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx2_ve2_999> i. 23, 2;<br> 24, 4;<br> ii. 7, 1. Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 78, was inclined, though without sufficient reason, to take the word as a proper name.</ref> Naked ascetics, such as are known throughout later Indian religious history, are evidently meant

वातवन्त्
<u>'''Vātavant'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xxv. 3, 6). He and '''[[दृति|Dṛti]]''' performed a certain Sattra or sacrificial session, but by stopping at a particular time he came to grief, and his descendants, the Vātavatas, were less prosperous than the '''Dārteyas.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वातवत
<u>'''Vātavata,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[वातवन्त्|Vātavant]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''Vṛṣaśuṣma''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1001> v. 29. ''Cf. Indische Studien,'' 4, 373.</ref> The [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1001> ii. 9.</ref> has the same form with a variant [[वाधावत|Vādhāvata]].

वात्सि
<u>'''Vātsi,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[वत्स|Vatsa]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''Sarpi''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vi. 24, 16).<br>==Foot Notes==

वात्सी-पुत्र
<u>'''Vātsī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of '''[[वत्स|Vatsa]],'''’ as the name of a teacher mentioned in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers)  of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] as a pupil of '''[[पाराशरीपुत्र|Pārāśarīputra]]''' according to the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension (vi, 5, 2), as a pupil of '''[[भारद्वाजीपुत्र|Bhāradvājīputra]]''' according to the Mādhyaṃdina (vi. 4, 31).<br>==Foot Notes==

वात्सी-माण्डवी-पुत्र
<u>'''Vātsī-[[माण्डवी|Māṇḍavī]]-putra'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[पाराशरीपुत्र|Pārāśarīputra]],''' according to the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 4, 30).<br>==Foot Notes==

वात्स्य
<u>'''Vātsya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[वत्स|Vatsa]],'''’ is the name of one or more teachers. One is mentioned in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1005> viii. 3.</ref> where the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx2_ve2_1005> iii. 2, 3.</ref> in the parallel passage has '''[[बाध्व|Bādhva]].''' Others occur in the Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] as pupils of '''Kuśri,'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1005> vi. 5, 4 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref> '''[[शाण्डिल्य|Śāṇḍilya]],'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_1005> ii. 5, 22;<br> iv. 5, 28 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 6, 5, 9.</ref> or another [[वात्स्य|Vātsya]],<ref name=fx5_ve2_1005> ii. 5, 20;<br> iv. 5, 26 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref> while a [[वात्स्य|Vātsya]] is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx6_ve2_1005> ix. 5, 1, 62.</ref>

वात्स्यायन
<u>'''Vātsyāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[वात्स्य|Vātsya]],'''’ is the name of a teacher in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka (i. 7, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

वादन
<u>'''Vādana'''</u> denotes the plectrum of a harp in the Āraṇyakas of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1007> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 5;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, viii. 9;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvii. 3, 14, etc.</ref>

वादित
<u>'''Vādita'''</u> is found denoting ‘music’ in the compound ''gītavādita,'' ‘song and music,’ in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (viii. 2, 8), and uncompounded in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xxix. 5) along with '''Nṛtya,''' ‘dance,’ and Gīta, ‘song.’ See '''[[शिल्प|Śilpa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वाधावत
<u>'''Vādhāvata'''</u> is a various reading in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1009> ii. 9. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 215, n.;<br> 2, 293, n.</ref> for '''[[वातावत|Vātāvata]].''' 

वाधूय
<u>'''Vādhūya'''</u> denotes the garment of the bride worn at the marriage ceremony and afterwards given to a Brahmin.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1010> Rv. x. 85, 34;<br> Av. xiv. 2, 41. ''Cf.'' [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], lxxix. 21;<br> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 8, 12, etc.</ref>

वाध्र्यश्व
<u>'''Vādhryaśva,'''</u> ‘connected with '''[[वध्र्य्अश्व|Vadhryaśva]],'''’ is apparently the epithet of Agni in a hymn of the Rigveda (x. 69, 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

वानस्पत्य
<u>'''Vānaspatya'''</u> (as a masculine) in one or two passages of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1012> viii. 8, 14;<br> xi. 9, 24. ''Cf.'' xii. 1, 27.</ref> seems to denote a ‘small tree.’ Elsewhere<ref name=fx2_ve2_1012> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 1, 7, 2;<br> 3, 1, 3;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 16, 1.</ref> (as a neuter) it has the sense of the ‘fruit of a tree’ ('''[[वनस्पति|Vanaspati]]''').

वाम-कक्षायण
<u>'''Vāma-kakṣāyaṇa'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[वात्स्य|Vātsya]]'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1013> x. 6, 5, 9. ''Cf.'' vii. 2, 1, 11.</ref> or '''[[शाण्डिल्य|Śāṇḍilya]]'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1013> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 5, 4 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]. ''Cf.'' Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 4, 1, 11.</ref> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].

वाम-देव
<u>'''Vāma-deva'''</u> is credited<ref name=fx1_ve2_1014> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 2, 1, etc.</ref> by tradition with the authorship of the fourth Maṇḍala of the Rigveda, and he is once mentioned in that Maṇḍala.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1014> iv. 16, 18.</ref> He is, moreover, credited with the authorship of the fourth hymn of the Maṇḍala by the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1014> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, x. 5;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 11;<br> iii. 2, 6.</ref> He there appears as a son of '''[[गोतम|Gotama]],''' while in one hymn of the fourth Maṇḍala of the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve2_1014> iv. 4, 11.</ref> [[गोतम|Gotama]] is mentioned as the father of the singer, and in another<ref name=fx5_ve2_1014> iv. 32, 9. 12.</ref> the Gotamas occur as praising Indra. In the Bṛhaddevatā<ref name=fx6_ve2_1014> iv. 126 131 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell' notes.</ref> two absurd legends are narrated of [[वामदेव|Vāmadeva]]. One describes Indra as revealing himself in the form of an eagle to the seer as he cooked the entrails of a dog; the other tells of his successful conflict with Indra, whom he sold among the seers. Sieg<ref name=fx7_ve2_1014> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 76 ''et seq.''</ref> has endeavoured to trace these tales in the  Rigveda,<ref name=fx8_ve2_1014> Rv iv. 27 and iv. 24 respectively. On the former hymn, see Oldenberg, ''Ṛigveda-Noten,'' 1, 291 ''et seq.;<br>'' on the latter, ''ibid.,'' 419 ''et seq.''</ref> but without any success. Moreover, though [[वामदेव|Vāmadeva]] is mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx9_ve2_1014> See Av. xviii. 3, 15. 16.</ref> and often in the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx10_ve2_1014> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 30, 2;<br> vi. 18, 1. 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 5, 1 (= [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 5, where [[वामदेव|Vāmadeva]] is credited with knowledge before birth);<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 4, 22 (Mādhyaṃdina = i. 4, 10 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 9, 27.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 123, 124;<br> Weber, Proceedings of the Berlin Academy, 1894, 789 ''et seq.;<br>'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 215.</ref> he never figures there as a hero of these legends.

वायत
<u>'''Vāyata,'''</u> ‘descendant of Vayant,’ is the patronymic of '''Pāśadyumna''' in the Rigveda (vii. 33, 2). ''Cf.'' '''Vyant.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वायस
<u>'''Vāyasa'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1016> i. 164, 32.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1016> In a Vedic citation in [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iv. 17;<br> and in verse 1 of [[खिल|Khila]] after Rv. v. 51.</ref> denotes a ‘large bird.’ The sense of ‘crow’<ref name=fx3_ve2_1016> The only sense of the word in the post-Vedic language.</ref> occurs in the Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] only.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1016> vi. 8.</ref>

वायो-विद्यिक
<u>'''Vāyo-vidyika,'''</u> ‘bird-catcher,’ is found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1017> xiii. 4, 3, 13. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 369, n. 5.</ref>

वाय्य
<u>'''Vāyya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[वय्य|Vayya]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''[[सत्यश्रवस्|Satyaśravas]]''' in the Rigveda (v. 79, 1. 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

वार्
<u>'''Vār'''</u> is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1019> i. 116, 22;<br> ii. 4, 6;<br> x. 12, 3;<br> 99, 4;<br> 105, 1, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1019> Av. iii. 13, 8;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 1, 1, 9, etc.</ref> denoting ‘water.’ In some passages<ref name=fx3_ve2_1019> Rv. iv. 19, 4;<br> viii. 98, 8;<br> ix. 112, 4.</ref> ‘stagnant water,’ ‘pond,’ is meant.

वारकि
<u>'''Vāraki,'''</u> ‘descendant of Varaka,’ is the patronymic of '''[[कंस|Kaṃsa]]''' in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 41, 1). <br>==Foot Notes==

वारक्य
<u>'''Vārakya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Varaka,’ is the patronymic, in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], of '''[[कंस|Kaṃsa]], Kubera, [[जनश्रुत|Janaśruta]], [[जयन्त|Jayanta]],''' and '''Proṣṭhapad.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वारण
<u>'''Vāraṇa'''</u> in two passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1022> viii. 33, 8;<br> x. 40, 4.</ref> is taken by Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_1022> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 1''c.''</ref> as an adjective with '''[[मृग|Mṛga]],''' meaning ‘wild beast.’ But the sense intended must have been ‘elephant,’ the usual sense of [[वारण|Vāraṇa]] in the classical literature. Probably the feminine Vāraṇī in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_1022> v. 14, 11.<br><br>''Cf.'' Pischel and Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, xv. 100-102;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 296;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 467;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 80.</ref> likewise denotes a ‘female elephant.’

वारुणि
<u>'''Vāruṇi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Varuṇa,’ is the patronymic of '''[[भृगु|Bhṛgu]].'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1023> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 34, 1;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 6, 1, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 1, etc.</ref>

वार्कलि
<u>'''Vārkali,'''</u> ‘descendant of Vṛkalā,’ is the metronymic of a teacher in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1024> xii. 3, 2, 6.</ref> The name in the form of Vārkalin has been seen in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1024> iii. 2, 2, and Keith's note;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, viii. 2. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 33, 123, who thinks [[वार्कलि|Vārkali]] is equivalent to Vāṣkali.</ref> but wrongly.

वार्कारुणी-पुत्र
<u>'''Vārkāruṇī-putra'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[आर्तभागीपुत्र|Ārtabhāgīputra]],''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1025> vi. 4, 31 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 5, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]], where also [[वार्कारुणीपुत्र|Vārkāruṇīputra]] is duplicated, one being the pupil of the other).</ref>

वार्ध्रा-णस
<u>'''Vārdhrā-ṇasa,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1026> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 20, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 20.</ref> '''Vārdhrī-nasa'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1026> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 39 (Prātiśākhya, iii. 89;<br> vi. 28).</ref> is the name of an animal in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the  [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās. The meaning seems to be, as taken by Sāyaṇa,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1026> On [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> ‘rhinoceros.’ Bo7htlingk<ref name=fx4_ve2_1026> Dictionary, ''s.v.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 80.</ref> quotes as other interpretations ‘an old white he-goat’ or ‘a kind of crane.’

वार्ष-गण
<u>'''Vārṣa-gaṇa,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[वृषगण|Vṛṣagaṇa]],’ is the patronymic of '''[[असित|Asita]]''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1027> vi. 4, 33 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 5, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref>

वार्षगणी-पुत्र
<u>'''Vārṣagaṇī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of [[वृषगण|Vṛṣagaṇa]],’ is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[गौतमी-पुत्र|Gautamī-putra]]''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 4, 31).<br>==Foot Notes==

वार्ष-गण्य
<u>'''Vārṣa-gaṇya,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[वृषगण|Vṛṣagaṇa]],’ is the name of a teacher in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1029> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372;<br> [[निदान|Nidāna]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 9;<br> vi. 7, etc. ''Cf.'' Garbe. ''Sāṃkhya Philosophie,'' 36.</ref>

वार्षा-गिर
<u>'''Vārṣā-gira,'''</u> ‘descendant of Vṛṣāgir,’ is the patronymic of '''[[अम्बरीष|Ambarīṣa]], [[ऋज्राश्व|Ṛjrāśva]], [[भयमान|Bhayamāna]]. [[सहदेव|Sahadeva]],''' and '''[[सुराधस्|Surādhas]],''' in the Rigveda (i. 100, 17).<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 113.<br>==Foot Notes==

वार्ष्ण
<u>'''Vārṣṇa,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[वृषन्|Vṛṣan]] or Vṛṣṇi or Vṛṣṇa,’ is the patronymic of '''[[गोबल|Gobala]]'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1031> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 11, 9, 3;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 1.</ref> and '''Barku,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1031> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 1, 10;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1, 8, where the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension (iv. 1, 4) has a ''varia lectio'' '''[[वार्ष्म|Vārṣma]].'''</ref> and of '''[[ऐक्ष्वाक|Aikṣvāka]].'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1031> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 4.</ref>

वार्ष्णि-वृद्ध
<u>'''Vārṣṇi-vṛddha,'''</u> ‘descendant of Vṛṣṇivṛddha,’ is the patronymic of '''Ula''' in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

वार्ष्णेय
<u>'''Vārṣṇeya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Vṛṣṇi,’ is the patronymic of '''Śūṣa''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 10, 9, 15). <br>==Foot Notes==

वार्ष्ण्य
<u>'''Vārṣṇya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Vṛṣṇi, is the patronymic of a man in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1034> iii. 1, 1, 4. The [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension omits the name. See Eggeling ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 2, n. 2.</ref>

वार्ष्म
<u>'''Vārṣma.'''</u> See '''[[वार्ष्ण|Vārṣṇa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वाल
<u>'''Vāla'''</u> denotes a ‘hair sieve’ in the later Saṃhitās and he Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1036> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 88;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 7, 3, 11;<br> 8, 1. 14, etc.</ref>

वाल-खिल्य
<u>'''Vāla-khilya'''</u> is the term applied in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_1037> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 15, 1, 3, 4;<br> vi. 24, 1. 4. 5. 10. 11;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxx. 4. 8;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 11, 3;<br> xiv. 5, 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, v. 2, 4, etc.;<br> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 9.</ref> to the supplementary hymns inserted after Rigveda viii. 48. The [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]] of these hymns are so named in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1037> i. 23.<br><br>''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 220;<br> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, xlvi ''et seq.;<br>'' Bṛhaddevatā, vi. 84 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes;<br> Scheftelowitz, ''Die Apokryphen des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 35 ''et seq.''</ref> ''Cf.'' 2. '''[[खिल|Khila]].'''

वाल-दामन्
<u>'''Vāla-dāman'''</u> denotes a ‘horse-hair strap’ in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (v. 3, 1, 10).<br>==Foot Notes==

वालिशिखायनि
<u>'''Vāliśikhāyani'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1039> vii. 21. ''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 49, n. 5.</ref>

वावाता
<u>'''Vāvātā'''</u> is in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_1040> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 22, 1. 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 3, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 2, 15 4, 1, 8;<br> 5, 2, 6, etc.</ref> the name of the king's ‘favourite’ wife. inferior to the '''[[महिषी|Mahiṣī]]''' only. 

वाशिता
<u>'''Vāśitā'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1041> v. 20, 2.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1041> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiii. 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 9, 9;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 18, 10;<br> 21, 14, etc.</ref> denotes a cow desiring the bull.

वाशी
<u>'''Vāśī'''</u> is mentioned in the Rigveda both as a weapon of the Maruts<ref name=fx1_ve2_1042> i. 37, 2;<br> 88, 3;<br> v. 53, 4.</ref> and as held by the god [[त्वष्टृ|Tvaṣṭṛ]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_1042> viii. 29, 3.</ref> as well as in other mythical surroundings.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1042> viii. 12, 12;<br> x. 53, 10;<br> 101, 10 (of the stones with which the Soma plant is manipulated), all doubtful passages.</ref> It is used, however, in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx4_ve2_1042> x. 6, 3 (where the manuscripts all have ''vāsyā:'' perhaps this is really a different word).</ref> of the carpenter's knife; here it may mean ‘awl,’ in accordance with Sāyaṇa's view.(**  5 Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 301.

वासः-पल्पूली
<u>'''Vāsaḥ-palpūlī,'''</u> ‘washer of clothes,’ is the name of one of the victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1043> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 7, 1.</ref>

वासस्
<u>'''Vāsas'''</u> is the most usual word in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1044> i. 34, 1;<br> 115, 4;<br> 162, 16;<br> viii. 3, 24;<br> x. 26, 6;<br> 102, 2, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1044> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 9, 7;<br> 11, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ii. 32;<br> xi. 40;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, etc. A garment of [[कुश|Kuśa]] grass is mentioned in Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2, 1, 8, as worn by the wife of the sacrificer at the consecration, but it is doubtful whether such dresses were normally worn. ''Cf.'' also ''kausumbha-[[परिधान|paridhāna]],'' ‘a silken garment,’ [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xi. 4.</ref> for ‘clothing.’ Clothes were often woven of sheep's wool (''cf.'' '''[[ऊर्णा|Ūrṇā]]'''); the god Pūṣan is called a ‘weaver of garments’ (''vāsevāya'')<ref name=fx3_ve2_1044> Rv. x. 26, 6.</ref> because of his connexion with the fashioning of forms. The garments worn were often embroidered (''cf.'' '''Peśas'''), and the Maruts are described as wearing mantles adorned with gold.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1044> Rv. v. 55, 6 (''hiraṇyayān athān'').</ref> When the ‘giver of garments’ (''vāso-dā'')<ref name=fx5_ve2_1044> Rv. x. 107, 2. ''Cf. [[वस्त्र|vastra]]-dā,'' v. 24, 8.</ref> is mentioned along with the giver of horses and gold, ornamental garments are probably meant. There are several references in the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve2_1044> Rv. i. 85, 1;<br> 92, 4;<br> ix. 96, 1, x. 1, 6.</ref> to the Indians' love of ornament, which is attested by Megas-  thenes for his day.<ref name=fx7_ve2_1044> See Strabo, p. 709;<br> Arrian, ''Indica,'' v. 9.</ref> The Rigveda also presents epithets like ''[[सु-वसन|su-vasana]]''<ref name=fx8_ve2_1044> Rv. ix. 97, 50.</ref> and ''su-[[रभि|rabhi]],''<ref name=fx9_ve2_1044> With ''atka,'' vi. 29, 3;<br> x. 123, 7. this word may possibly indicate that early Vedic dress was fitted like the Minoan style of dress, and unlike the later Achæan style as seen in Homer (''cf.'' Lang, ''The World of Homer,'' 60 ''et seq.'').</ref> implying that garments were becoming or well-fitting.<br><br>The Vedic Indian seems often to have worn three garments-an undergarment (''cf.'' '''[[नीवि|Nīvi]]'''),<ref name=fx10_ve2_1044> Av. viii. 2, 16;<br> xiv. 2, 50. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 1, 3;<br> Vājasanevi Saṃhitā, iv. 10, etc.</ref> a garment,<ref name=fx11_ve2_1044> [[वासस्|Vāsas]] in the narrower sense, Av. viii. 2, 16.</ref> and an overgarment (''cf.'' '''Adhīvāsa'''),<ref name=fx12_ve2_1044> Rv. i. 140, 9;<br> 162, 16;<br> x. 5, 4.</ref> which was presumably a mantle, and for which the names '''Atka''' and '''[[द्रापि|Drāpi]]''' also seem to be used. This accords with the description of the sacrificial garments given in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx13_ve2_1044> v. 3, 5, 20 ''et seq.'' See Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 85 ''et seq.''</ref> which comprise a '''[[तार्प्य|Tārpya]],''' perhaps a ‘silken undergarment’; secondly, a garment of undyed wool, and then a mantle, while the ends of the turban, after being tied behind the neck, are brought forward and tucked away in front. The last point would hardly accord with the usual practice in ordinary life, but seems to be a special sacrificial ritual act. A similar sort of garments in the case of women appears to be alluded to in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx14_ve2_1044> viii. 2, 16;<br> xiv. 2, 50.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx15_ve2_1044> v. 2, 1, 8.</ref> There is nothing to show exactly what differences there were between male and female costume, nor what was exactly the nature of the clothes in either case.<br><br>It is important to note that the Vedic Indian evidently assumed that all civilized persons other than inspired Munis would wear clothing of some sort.<ref name=fx16_ve2_1044> ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 1, 1;<br> and iii. 1, 2, 13-17, where the fact that man alone wears clothes is accounted for by a silly legend.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 261, 262.</ref><br><br>See also '''[[वसन|Vasana]], [[वस्त्र|Vastra]], Otu, [[तन्तु|Tantu]].''' For the use of skin garments, see '''Mala.'''

वासिष्ठ
<u>'''Vāsiṣṭha,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''[[सात्यहव्य|Sātyahavya]],''' a teacher mentioned several times in the later  Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1045> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 6, 2, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 17 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 474);<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 3, 9;<br> iv. 8, 7. For his enmity to '''Atyarāti,''' see [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 23, 9, 10.</ref> of '''Rauhina''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1045> i. 12, 7.</ref> and of '''[[चैकितानेय|Caikitāneya]].'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1045> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 42, 1;<br> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 384. ''Cf.'' Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 10.</ref> Moreover, reference is made to the claim of the Vāsiṣṭhas to be [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] priest at the sacrifice.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1045> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 5, 2, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 17;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 6, 1, 41. See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 34;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 212, n. (correcting the rendering of Delbrück, ''Altindische Syntax,'' 570).</ref> A [[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]] is mentioned as a teacher in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_1045> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373.</ref> and the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx6_ve2_1045> iii. 15, 2.</ref>

वास्तु-पश्य
<u>'''Vāstu-paśya,'''</u> according to Bo7htlingk<ref name=fx1_ve2_1046> Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' supplement 6.</ref> a name of a [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], is a mere error for ''Vāstupasya''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1046> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 26, 61.</ref> in the Jaiminiya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_1046> iii. 120.</ref>

वाह
<u>'''Vāha'''</u> is found in the Rigveda (iv. 57, 4. 8) and the Atharvaveda (vi. 102, 1) apparently denoting an ox for ‘drawing’ the plough. See also '''[[रथवाहन|Rathavāhana]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वाहन
<u>'''Vāhana'''</u> (neut.) in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_1048> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 9, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 2, 9;<br> ii. 1, 4, 4;<br> iv. 4, 4, 10.</ref> denotes a ‘beast of burden,’ or occasionally<ref name=fx2_ve2_1048> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 4, 2, 11.</ref> a ‘cart.’ ''Cf.'' '''[[रथवाहन|Rathavāhana]].'''

वाहस
<u>'''Vāhasa,'''</u> ‘boa constrictor,’ is included in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1049> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 13, 1;<br> 14, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 15;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 34. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 94.</ref> 

वि
<u>'''Vi'''</u> in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1050> ii. 29, 5;<br> 38, 7;<br> vi. 64, 6, etc.</ref> and sometimes later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1050> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], v. 6, 15, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 87.</ref> denotes ‘bird.’

वि-ककर
<u>'''Vi-kakara'''</u> is the name of some bird, a victim at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) according to the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1051> xxiv. 20. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 94;<br> in Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xx. 14, 5, ''vikira'' (with variants ''vikikira, [[विककर|vikakara]]'') is read.</ref>

वि-कङ्कत
<u>'''Vi-kaṅkata'''</u> is the name of a tree (''Flacourtia sapida''), often mentioned in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_1052> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 5, 7, 3;<br> vi. 4, 10, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xix. 10;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 9. ''Cf.'' Av. xi. 10, 3.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1052> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 4, 10;<br> v. 2, 4, 18, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 59.</ref>

वि-क्रय
<u>'''Vi-kraya'''</u> is found in the Atharvaveda (iii. 15, 4) and the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (iii. 4) denoting ‘sale.’ See '''[[क्रय|Kraya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वि-क्लिन्दु
<u>'''Vi-klindu'''</u> is the name of a disease in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1054> xii. 4. 5.</ref> Bloomfield<ref name=fx2_ve2_1054> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 658.</ref> suggests ‘catarrh.’

वि-घन
<u>'''Vi-ghana'''</u> in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_1055> iii. 2, 4, 1. The Av., vii. 28, 1, has ''[[द्रुघण|drughaṇa]].''</ref> seems to denote ‘club.’

वि-चक्षण ताण्ड्य
<u>'''Vi-cakṣaṇa Tāṇḍya'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[गर्दभीमुख|Gardabhīmukha]]''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1056> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373.</ref>

वि-चारिन् काबन्धि
<u>'''Vi-cārin Kābandhi'''</u> (‘descendant of '''Kabandha'''’) is the name of a mythical teacher in the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1057> i. 2, 9, 18. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 176, n. 4;<br> Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 111, 112.</ref> 

वि-चृत्
<u>'''Vi-cṛt'''</u> in the dual is found in three passages of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1058> ii. 8, 1;<br> vi. 110, 2;<br> 121, 3. See also iii. 7, 4.</ref> where Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_1058> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> sees in the term the name of two stars, while in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve2_1058> iv. 4, 10, 2.</ref> he thinks they mean the '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]]''' called [[मूल|Mūla]]. There can, however, be no doubt that the asterism is intended in all the passages.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1058> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 356;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 361, points out that [[विचृतौ|Vicṛtau]] are and  Scorpionis, while [[मूल|Mūla]] includes the tail as a whole.</ref>

विज्
<u>'''Vij.'''</u> See 2. '''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वि-जामातृ
<u>'''Vi-jāmātṛ.'''</u> See '''[[जामातृ|Jāmātṛ]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वितस्ता
<u>'''Vitastā,'''</u> the most westerly of the five rivers of the Panjab, is only mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1061> x. 75, 5;<br> '''[[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],''' ix. 26;<br> ''cf.'' Kāśikā Vṛtti on Pāṇini, i. 4, 31. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 12;<br> ''Imperial Gazetteer of India,'' 14, 160.</ref> in the Nadīstuti (‘Praise of Rivers’).<ref name=fx2_ve2_1061> The rareness of the name in the Rigveda points to the Panjab not having been the seat of the activity of the greater part of the Vedic Indians.</ref> It is the Hydaspes of Alexander's historians, more correctly reproduced by Ptolemy as Bidaspes. The name appears in the Mohammedan historians corrupted to Bihat or Wihat, and survives in the modern Kashmīrī form of Veth.

वित्त
<u>'''Vitta'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1062> v. 42, 9;<br> x. 34, 13.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1062> Av. xii. 3, 52;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 5, 9, 2;<br> vi. 2, 4, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 11. 14, etc.</ref> denotes ‘wealth,’ ‘possessions.’ The earth is referred to in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_1062> ii. 8. ''Cf.'' the name ''vasumatī'' found in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xiii. 1.</ref> as full of riches (''vittasya pūrṇā''). The doctrine that a man's greatness depends on his wealth is found as early as the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_1062> i. 4, 7, 7.</ref> The striving after wealth (''vittaiṣaṇā'') is mentioned in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_1062> iii. 4, 1;<br> iv. 4, 26.</ref> as one of the things abandoned by the sage. 

विदग्ध शाकल्य
<u>'''Vidagdha Śākalya'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a contemporary and rival of '''[[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]]''' at the court of '''[[जनक|Janaka]]''' of '''[[विदेह|Videha]]''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1063> iii. 9, 1;<br> iv. 1, 17 (Mādhyaṃdina = 7 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_1063> ii. 76 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 239).</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_1063> xi. 6, 3, 3.</ref>

विदथ
<u>'''Vidatha'''</u> is a word of obscure sense, confined mainly to the Rigveda. According to Roth,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1064> Rv. i. 31, 6;<br> 117, 25;<br> iii. 1, 18;<br> 27, 7;<br> iv. 38, 4;<br> vi. 8, 1;<br> x. 85, 26;<br> 92, 2;<br> Av. iv. 25, 1;<br> v. 20, 12;<br> xviii. 3, 70, etc.</ref> the sense is primarily ‘order,’ then the concrete body which gives orders, then ‘assembly’ for secular<ref name=fx2_ve2_1064> ii. 1, 4;<br> 27, 12, 17;<br> iii. 38, 5, 6;<br> v. 63, 2;<br> vii. 66, 10;<br> viii. 39, 1;<br> x. 12, 7;<br> Av. xvii. 1, 15. So Whitney renders the word in Av. i. 13, 4, as ‘council,’ Translation of the Atharvaveda, 15.</ref> or religious ends,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1064> Rv. i. 60, 1;<br> ii. 4, 8;<br> 39, 1;<br> iii. 1, 1;<br> 56, 8, etc.</ref> or for war.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1064> Rv. i. 166, 2;<br> 167, 6;<br> v. 59, 2, etc.</ref> Oldenberg<ref name=fx5_ve2_1064> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 46, 26 ''et seq.'' But in ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gesellschaft,'' 54, 609-611, he falls back on the derivation from ''vidh,'' ‘worship.’ ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 23, n. 10.</ref> once thought that the main idea is ‘ordinance’ (from ''vi-dhā,'' ‘dispose,’ ‘ordain’), and thence ‘sacrifice.’ Ludwig<ref name=fx6_ve2_1064> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 259 ''et seq.''</ref> thinks that the root idea is an ‘assembly,’ especially of the '''Maghavans''' and the Brahmins. Geldner<ref name=fx7_ve2_1064> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 147;<br> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 52, 757;<br> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 161.</ref> considers that the word primarily means ‘knowledge,’ ‘wisdom,’ ‘priestly lore,’ then ‘sacrifice’ and ‘spiritual authority.’ Bloomfield,<ref name=fx8_ve2_1064> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 12 ''et seq.''</ref> on the other hand, insists that [[विदथ|Vidatha]] refers to the ‘house’<ref name=fx9_ve2_1064> See Rigveda, x. 85, 26. 27 (of the wife in the marriage ritual);<br> i. 117, 25;<br> ii. 1, 6;<br> Av. xviii. 3, 70.</ref> in the first place (from ''vid,'' ‘acquire’), and then to the ‘sacrifice,’ as connected with the house; this interpretation, at any rate, appears to suit all the passages. The term ''vidathya,'' once<ref name=fx10_ve2_1064> iv. 27, 2. In i. 91, 20;<br> 167, 3;<br> Av. xx. 128, 1, ''vidathya,'' ‘having an establishment,’ seems adequate.</ref> applied to the king (''samrāṭ''), might seem to be against this view, but it may refer to his being ‘rich in homesteads’; and the connexion of the woman with the [[विदथ|Vidatha]], as opposed to  the '''[[सभा|Sabhā]],''' tells in favour<ref name=fx11_ve2_1064> ''Cf.'' Av. vii. 38, 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 7, 4.</ref> of Bloomfield's explanation. That the word ever denotes an asylum, like the house of the Brahmin,<ref name=fx12_ve2_1064> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 1, 13, with Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 3, 35.</ref> as Ludwig<ref name=fx13_ve2_1064> ''Op. cit.,'' 3, 261.</ref> suggests, is doubtful.<ref name=fx14_ve2_1064> Rv. i. 31, 6;<br> v. 62, 6;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 30, 27, 28, certainly does not show this clearly.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 177, who suggests that [[विदथ|Vidatha]] sometimes means (''e.g.,'' in ''vidatheṣu praśastaḥ,'' Rv. ii. 27, 12) a smaller assembly than the [[सम्इति|Samiti]]. But we have no ground to be certain that such smaller assemblies ever existed at an early date either in India or elsewhere among Āryan peoples.</ref>

विदन्वन्त् भार्गव
<u>'''Vidanvant Bhārgava'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[भृगु|Bhṛgu]]'''’) is mentioned as the seer of a Sāman or chant in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1065> xiii. 11, 10.</ref> and in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_1065> iii. 159 ''et seq.'' (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 26, 64).</ref>

विदर्भ
<u>'''Vidarbha'''</u> occurs in the earlier Vedic literature as the name of a place only in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1066> ii. 440 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 103, n. 3).</ref> where its '''Mācalas''' (perhaps a species of dog) are said to kill tigers.

विदर्भी-कौण्डिनेय
<u>'''Vidarbhī-Kauṇḍineya'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''Vatsanapāt''' in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1067> ii. 5, 22;<br> iv. 5, 28 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]])</ref>

वि-दिश्
<u>'''Vi-diś'''</u> denotes<ref name=fx1_ve2_1068> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vi. 19;<br> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 4.</ref> an ‘intermediate quarter.’ See '''[[दिश्|Diś]].'''

विदीगय
<u>'''Vidīgaya'''</u> is the name of an animal in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_1069> v. 6, 22, 1.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_1069> iii. 9, 9, 3;<br> Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xx. 22, 13.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 94.</ref> The commentary on the former takes it as a kind of cock (''[[कुक्कुट|kukkuṭa]]-viśeṣa''), that on the latter as a white heron (''śveta-baka''). 

विदेघ
<u>'''Videgha'''</u> is the name of a man, '''[[माथव|Māthava]],''' in the Śatapatha Brāhmana.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1070> i. 4, 1, 10 ''et seq.''</ref> It is legitimate to assume<ref name=fx2_ve2_1070> ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xli, n. 4;<br> 104, n.;<br> Weber ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 170;<br> ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 13;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 134.</ref> that it is a name given to him as king of the Videghas who are the later '''Videhas.'''

विदेह
<u>'''Videha'''</u> is the name of a people who are not mentioned before the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] period. In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1071> i. 4, 1, 10 ''et seq.''</ref> the legend of '''[[विदेघ|Videgha]] [[माथव|Māthava]]''' preserves clearly a tradition that in [[विदेह|Videha]] culture came from the Brahmins of the West, and that '''[[कोसल|Kosala]]''' was brahminized before [[विदेह|Videha]]. The Videhas, however, derived some fame later from the culture of their king '''[[जनक|Janaka]],''' who figures in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1071> iii. 8, 2. ''Cf.'' iv. 2, 6;<br> 9, 30;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 3, 1, 2;<br> 6, 2, 1;<br> 3, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 10, 9, 9.</ref> as one of the leading patrons of the [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]] doctrine. In the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_1071> iv. 1.</ref> the Videhas are joined with the '''Kāśis;''' in the list of peoples in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_1071> viii. 14.</ref> the Videhas are passed over, probably because, with [[कोसल|Kosala]] and [[काशि|Kāśi]], they are included in the term '''Prācyas,''' ‘easterners.’ Again, in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_1071> xvi. 29. 5.</ref> it is recorded that the [[काशि|Kāśi]], [[कोसल|Kosala]], and [[विदेह|Videha]] kingdoms had each the one [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], '''[[जल जातूकर्ण्य|Jala Jātūkarṇya]];''' and in another passage of the same text<ref name=fx6_ve2_1071> xvi. 9, 11. 13.</ref> the connexion between the [[विदेह|Videha]] king, '''[[पर आट्णार|Para Āṭṇāra]],''' and the [[कोसल|Kosala]] king, '''[[हिरण्यनाभ|Hiraṇyanābha]],''' is explained, while the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx7_ve2_1071> xiii. 5, 4, 4.</ref> speaks of [[पर आट्णार|Para Āṭṇāra]] as the [[कोसल|Kosala]] king, descendant of [[हिरण्यनाभ|Hiraṇyanābha]].<br><br>Another king of [[विदेह|Videha]] was '''[[नमी साप्य|Namī Sāpya]],''' mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx8_ve2_1071> xxv. 10, 17.</ref> In the Saṃhitās of the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]]<ref name=fx9_ve2_1071> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 4, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiv. 5.</ref> ‘cows of Videha’ seem to be alluded to, though the commentator on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā merely takes the adjective ''vaidehī'' as ‘having a splendid body’ (''viśiṣṭa-deha-sambandhinī''), and the point of a place name in the expression is not very obvious. The Videhas also occur in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx10_ve2_1071> ii. 5;<br> xxi. 13.</ref> in [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]-like passages.<br><br>The boundary of [[कोसल|Kosala]] and [[विदेह|Videha]] was the '''[[सदानीरा|Sadānīrā]],'''  probably the modern Gandak<ref name=fx11_ve2_1071> ''Cf. Imperial Gaxetteer of India,'' 12, 125.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 170;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 10, 33, 53, 127, 129, etc.;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xli;<br> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 398, 399;<br> Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 26, 37;<br> Pargiter, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1910, 19 ''et seq.''</ref> (the Kondochates of the Greek geographers), which, rising in Nepal, flows into the Ganges opposite Patna. [[विदेह|Videha]] itself corresponds roughly to the modern Tirhut.

विद्या
<u>'''Vidyā'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1072> vi. 116, 1;<br> xi. 7, 10;<br> 8, 3.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1072> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 2, 8;<br> v. 1, 7, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 23, 8. 9, etc.</ref> denotes ‘knowledge,’ especially that of the three Vedas, which are called the ''trayī [[विद्या|vidyā]],'' ‘the threefold knowledge,’ as early as the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_1072> iii. 10, 11, 5. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 5, 6, etc.</ref> In a more special sense [[विद्या|Vidyā]] occurs in lists of objects of study in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_1072> xi. 5, 6, 8;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 4, 10;<br> iv. 5, 11.</ref> What exactly the expression here means is uncertain: Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx5_ve2_1072> On Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 6, 8.</ref> suggests the philosophic systems; Geldner<ref name=fx6_ve2_1072> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 290, n. 4.</ref> the first Brāhmaṇas; and Eggeling,<ref name=fx7_ve2_1072> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 98, n. 2.</ref> more probably, special sciences like the '''[[सर्पविद्या|Sarpavidyā]]''' or the '''[[विषविद्या|Viṣavidyā]].'''

विद्रध
<u>'''Vidradha'''</u> denotes a disease, ‘abscesses,’ in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1073> vi. 127, 1;<br> ix. 8, 20.</ref> According to Zimmer,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1073> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 386.</ref> it was a symptom accompanying '''[[यक्ष्म|Yakṣma]].''' Later it is called Vidradhi. Ludwig<ref name=fx3_ve2_1073> Translation of the Rigveda, 5, 93. ''Cf.'' Roth, ''[[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], Erläuterungen,'' 42, 43.</ref> compares the obscure [[विद्रध|Vidradha]] of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1073> iv. 32, 23.</ref> where, however, the sense of the word is very uncertain.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1073> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 295.<br><br>''Cf.'' Wise, ''System of Hindu Medicine,'' 210;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 531, 602;<br> ''Atharvaveda,'' 60;<br> Grohmann, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 397;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 376.</ref>

विधवा
<u>'''Vidhavā'''</u> denotes ‘widow’ as the ‘desolate one,’ from the root ''vidh,'' ‘be bereft.’ The masculine ''vidhava'' is conjectured  by Roth<ref name=fx1_ve2_1074> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' so also Grassmann.</ref> in a difficult passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1074> x. 40, 8.</ref> where the received text presents the apparent false concord ''vidhantaṃ vidhavām,'' in which he sees a metrical lengthening for ''vidhavam,'' ‘the sacrificing widower.’ Ludwig in his version takes ''vidhantam'' as equivalent to a feminine, while Delbrück<ref name=fx3_ve2_1074> ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 443.</ref> prefers ‘the worshipper and the widow.’ Possibly ‘the widower and the widow’ may be meant; but we know nothing of the mythological allusion in question, the feat being one of those attributed to the Aśvins, and the natural reference to '''[[घोषा|Ghoṣā]]''' as ‘husbandless’ being rendered unlikely because their feat in regard to her has already been mentioned a few verses before in the same hymn.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1074> x. 40. 5.</ref> The word [[विधवा|Vidhavā]] is not of common occurrence.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1074> Rv. iv. 18, 12;<br> x. 40, 2;<br> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 15.</ref>

विधु
<u>'''Vidhu'''</u> seems clearly to mean (as it does in the post-Vedic language) the ‘moon’ in a passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1075> x. 55, 5;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], xiv. 18. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 465. That the ‘many’ are the '''Nakṣatras''' is neither certain nor even probable. The stars are an adequate explanation.</ref> where it is alluded to as ‘wandering solitary in the midst of many’ (''vidhuṃ dadrāṇaṃ samane bahūnām'').

वि-नशन
<u>'''Vi-naśana,'''</u> ‘disappearance,’ is the name of the place where the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]''' is lost in the sands of the desert. It is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1076> xxv. 10, 6;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxiv. 5, 30;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 15, 1;<br> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 1, 2, 12. ''Cf.'' Bühler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 14, 2, 147.</ref> and the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_1076> iv. 26.</ref> The locality is the Patiala district of the Panjab.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1076> ''Cf. Imperial Gazetteer of India,'' 22, 97.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[प्लक्ष प्रास्रवण|Plakṣa Prāsravaṇa]].'''

विप्
<u>'''Vip'''</u> in several passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1077> ix. 3, 2;<br> 65, 12;<br> 99, 1.</ref> refers, according to Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1077> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> to the rods which form the bottom of the Soma filter,  and on which the straining cloth is stretched. But this explanation is very doubtful.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1077> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 203;<br> Bergaigne, ''Religion Vedique,'' 1, v;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellchaft,'' 54, 171;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 97-110.</ref>

वि-पथ
<u>'''Vi-patha,'''</u> in the description of the '''[[व्रात्य|Vrātya]],'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1078> Av. xv. 2, 1;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 1, 14;<br> Lāṭyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 6, 9;<br> Anupada [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], v. 4;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxii. 4, 11;<br> Āpastamba Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxii. 5, 5;<br> ''cf.'' vii. 3, 8. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 44.</ref> denotes a vehicle suited for rough roads. ''Cf.'' '''Anas.'''

विपश्चित् दृढ-जयन्त लौहित्य
<u>'''1. Vipaścit [[दृढ-जयन्त|Dṛḍha-jayanta]] Lauhitya'''</u> (‘descendant of Lohita’) is mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 42, 1) as the pupil of '''[[दक्ष जयन्त लौहित्य|Dakṣa <a class="pada_vei" href="जयन्त">Jayanta]] Lauhitya».'''<br>==Foot Notes==

विपश्चित् शकुनि-मित्र पाराशर्य
<u>'''2. Vipaścit [[शकुनि-मित्र|Śakuni-mitra]] Pārāśarya'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[पराशर|Parāśara]]'''’) is the name of a teacher, pupil of [[अषाढ उत्तर पाराशर्य|Aṣāḍha Uttara Pārāśarya]], in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] Brāhmana (iii. 41, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

वि-पाश्
<u>'''Vi-pāś'''</u> (‘fetterless’) is the name of a river mentioned twice in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1081> iii. 33, 1. 3;<br> iv. 30, 11. [[यास्क|Yāska]], [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], xi. 48, sees in the latter passage an adjective ''vi-[[पाशिन्|pāśin]],'' but this is very improbable. See Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 294.</ref> It is the modern Beās in the Panjab, the Hyphasis, Hypanis or Bipasis of the Greeks. Its small importance for the Vedic Indians is indicated by the fact that it is never mentioned in the earlier Vedic literature except in two hymns of the Rigveda. The [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1081> ix. 26. The [[विपाश्|Vipāś]] is also mentioned in connexion with the '''[[शुतुद्री|Śutudrī]]''' in ii. 24;<br> ix. 36.</ref> preserves the notice that its earlier name was '''[[उरुञ्जिरा|Uruñjirā]],''' while the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_1081> i. 2, 7.</ref> places in the middle of it the ''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]]-śilāḥ.'' Pāṇinī<ref name=fx4_ve2_1081> iv. 2, 74.</ref> mentions the name, which otherwise in post-Vedic literature appears as Vipāśā. This river has changed its course considerably since ancient times.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1081> See ''Imperiat Gazctteer of India,'' 7, 138 (Beās).<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 11.</ref> 

वि-पूजन शौराकि
<u>'''Vi-pūjana Śaurāki'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1082> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 3.</ref> or Saurāki<ref name=fx2_ve2_1082> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxvii. 5.</ref> is the name of a teacher in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.

विपृथु
<u>'''Vipṛthu'''</u> in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xiv. 72, 3) is apparently equivalent to the '''[[विपथ|Vipatha]],''' ‘rough cart,’ of other texts. It is probably a mere blunder.<br>==Foot Notes==

विप्र
<u>'''Vipra'''</u> seems to mean ‘inspired singer’ (from ''vip,'' ‘quiver’) in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1084> i. 129, 2. 11;<br> 162, 7;<br> iv. 26, 1, etc. Seven are spoken of in iii. 7, 7;<br> 31. 5;<br> iv. 2, 15, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1084> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 9, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ix. 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 2, 7, etc.</ref> More especially in the later texts<ref name=fx3_ve2_1084> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 3, 12, etc.</ref> it denotes a ‘learned Brahmin.’ In the epic style it comes to mean no more than ‘Brahmin.’

विप्र-चित्ति
<u>'''Vipra-citti'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1085> ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]</ref> or '''[[विप्र|Vipra]]-jitti'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1085> ii. 5, 22;<br> iv. 5, 28 Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> is the name of a teacher in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].

विप्र-जन सौराकि
<u>'''Vipra-jana Saurāki'''</u> is the form of the name of '''Vipūjana''' given by the St. Petersburg Dictionaries for the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1086> xxvii. 5;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 477, gives this form, which is due to a misreading of the ligature for ''ū.''</ref>

विबाली
<u>'''Vibālī'''</u> is found once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1087> iv. 30, 12. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 12, 18.</ref> apparently as the name of an unknown stream.

विभण्डक काश्यप
<u>'''Vibhaṇḍaka Kāśyapa'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[कश्यप|Kaśyapa]]'''’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[ऋष्यशृङ्ग|Ṛṣyaśṛṅga]]''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1088> ''Indische Studīen,'' 4, 374. ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Vibhāṇḍaka,'' which is the more correct spelling (Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.'').</ref> 

वि-भिन्दु
<u>'''Vi-bhindu'''</u> is the name of a sacrificer in the Rigveda (viii. 2, 91).<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins. ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 59.<br>==Foot Notes==

विभिन्दुक
<u>'''Vibhinduka'''</u> occurs in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1090> xv. 10, 11.</ref> as the name of a man or a demon<ref name=fx2_ve2_1090> ''Cf.'' Sāyaṇa, ''a.l.''</ref> from whom '''[[मेधातिथि|Medhātithi]]''' drove away the cows. Hopkins<ref name=fx3_ve2_1090> ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 60, n. 1.</ref> is inclined to read Vaibhinduka as a patronymic of [[मेधातिथि|Medhātithi]]. ''Cf.'' '''[[विभिन्दुकीय|Vibhindukīya]].'''

विभिन्दुकीय
<u>'''Vibhindukīya'''</u> is the name of a group of priests whose Sattra is mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1091> iii. 233 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 38).</ref>

विभीतक
<u>'''Vibhītaka'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1092> This form is the regular one after the Rigveda.</ref> and '''Vibhīdaka,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1092> Rv. vii. 86, 6;<br> x. 34, 1.</ref> the latter being the old form, denote a large tree, the ''Terminalia bellerica,'' the nut of which was used in dicing.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1092> Rv., ''loc. cit.'' See 2. '''[[अक्ष|Akṣa]].'''</ref> The wood was also used for making the<ref name=fx4_ve2_1092> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 5, 8;<br> 7, 3. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 8, 1, 16, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 62;<br> Roth, ''Gurupūjākaumudī,'' 1-4;<br> Lüders, ''Das Wūrfelspiel im alten Indien,'' 17-19.</ref> sacrificial fire burn.

वि-मद
<u>'''1. Vi-mada'''</u> is credited by the Anukramaṇī (Index) with the authorship of a number of hymns of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1093> Rv. x. 20-26.</ref> This attribution is supported by the occurrence in this group of the name of the seer,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1093> Rv. x. 20, 10;<br> 23, 7.</ref> and once of his family, the Vimadas,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1093> Rv. x. 23, 6.</ref> besides the repeated refrain<ref name=fx4_ve2_1093> Rv. x. 21, 1-8;<br> 24, 1-3.</ref> ''vi vo made,'' ‘in your carouses.’ [[विमद|Vimada]] is occasionally alluded to later.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1093> Av. iv. 29, 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 1.</ref> 

विमद
<u>'''2. Vimada'''</u> is mentioned in several passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1094> i. 51, 3;<br> 112, 19;<br> 116, 1;<br> 117, 20;<br> x. 39, 7;<br> 65, 12, From viii. 9, 15, Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 105, has inferred that [[विमद|Vimada]] and [[वत्स|Vatsa]] were identical.</ref> as a protégé of the Aśvins, who gave him a wife, '''[[कमद्यू|Kamadyū]].''' His identity with the preceding is improbable.

वि-मुक्ता
<u>'''Vi-muktā'''</u> (lit., ‘secreted’), ‘pearl,’ is found in the late Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (v. 6).<br>==Foot Notes==

वि-मोक्तृ
<u>'''Vi-moktṛ'''</u> in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha<ref name=fx1_ve2_1096> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 14;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 10, 1 (''cf. vimoktrī,'') used metaphorically, ''ibid.,'' iii. 7. 14, 1).</ref> (‘human sacrifice’) denotes one who unharnesses horses from the chariot, as opposed to Yoktṛ, ‘one who yokes.’ The corresponding verbal noun Vimocana, ‘unyoking,’ is often found.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1096> Rv. iii. 53, 5, 20;<br> iv. 46, 7, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 1, 5, etc.</ref>

वि-राज्
<u>'''Vi-rāj'''</u> as a title of royalty is mentioned several times in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1097> i. 188, 5;<br> ix. 96, 18;<br> x. 166, 1, etc.;<br> Av. xii. 3, 11;<br> xiv. 2, 15, etc.</ref> but only in a metaphorical sense. As an actual title, it is asserted in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1097> viii. 14, 3.</ref> to be used by the '''Uttara Kurus''' and the '''Uttara Madras.'''

वि-रूप
<u>'''Vi-rūpa'''</u> is the name of an Aṅgirasa who is twice mentioned in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1098> i. 45, 3;<br> viii. 75, 6.</ref> and to whom certain hymns are attributed by the Anukramaṇī (Index).<br><br>^2 viii. 43 ''et seq.;'' 64.

विलिगी
<u>'''Viligī'''</u> denotes a kind of snake in the Atharvaveda (v. 13, 7).<br>==Foot Notes==

विलिष्ट-भेषज
<u>'''Viliṣṭa-bheṣaja'''</u> in the Atharvaveda (Paippalāda, xx. 5, 2) denotes a remedy for a dislocation or a sprain. <br>==Foot Notes==

वि-लोहित
<u>'''Vi-lohita'''</u> is the name of a disease mentioned in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1101> ix. 8, 1;<br> xii. 4, 4</ref> Bloomfield<ref name=fx2_ve2_1101> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 657.</ref> thinks that ‘flow of blood from the nose’ is meant; Henry<ref name=fx3_ve2_1101> ''Les livres viii. et ix. de l' Atharvaveda,'' 105, 142.</ref> renders it ‘decomposition of the blood’; and Whitney<ref name=fx4_ve2_1101> Translation of the Atharvaveda 549.</ref> has ‘anæmia.’

वि-वध
<u>'''Vi-vadha'''</u> or '''Vī-vadha''' seems to denote a yoke borne on the shoulders to enable one to carry a weight. But it is found in the Brāhmaṇas used only metaphorically in such phrases as ''vi-[[विवध|vivadha]],''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1102> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 2, 5, 2;<br> 7, 3;<br> ''vivīvadha,'' [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 5, 19;<br> ''ubhayato -vīvadha,'' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxvii. 10.</ref> ‘with the weight unequally distributed,’ and ''savīvadhatā,''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1102> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 1, 4;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1, 10;<br> ''sa-vīvadha-tva,'' v. 1, 11: xxii. 5, 7, etc.</ref> ‘equality of burden.’

वि-वयन
<u>'''Vi-vayana'''</u> denotes in the Brāhmaṇas ‘plaited work,’ such as that used in a couch ('''Asandī''').<br><br>^1 [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 5, 3; Śatapatha Brāhmaṇā, xii. 8, 3, 6. In the Sūtras ''vivāna'' has the same sense; Lāṭyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii, 12, 1, etc.<br>==Foot Notes==

वि-वाह
<u>'''Vi-vāha,'''</u> ‘marriage,’ is mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1104> xii. 1, 24;<br> xiv. 2, 65. The Rigvedic term is '''[[वहतु|Vahatu]].'''</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1104> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 2, 8, 7;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxv. 3;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 10, 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv, 27, 5, and often in the Sūtras.</ref> See '''Pati.'''

विश्
<u>'''Viś'''</u> is an expression of somewhat doubtful significance. In many passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1105> iv. 4, 3;<br> 37, 1;<br> v. 3. 5;<br> vi. 21, 4;<br> 48, 8;<br> vii. 56, 22;<br> 61, 3, 70, 3;<br> 104, 18;<br> x. 91, 2, etc.</ref> the sense of ‘settlement’ or ‘dwelling’ is adequate and probable, since the root ''[[विश्|viś]]'' means to ‘enter’ or ‘settle.’ In other passages, where the Viśaḥ  stand in relation to a prince, the term must mean ‘subject’;<ref name=fx2_ve2_1105> Rv. iv. 50, 8;<br> vi. 8, 4;<br> x. 124, 8;<br> 173, 6;<br> Av. iii. 4, 1;<br> iv. 8, 4;<br> 22, 1. 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 8, 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, viii. 46;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 2. 17;<br> iv. 2, 1, 3;<br> v. 3, 3, 12;<br> 4, 2, 3;<br> x. 6, 2, 1;<br> xiii. 6, 2, 8;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv, 12, etc. Many of the passages cited under note 11 may also belong here, while in Av. iii. 4, 1, etc., reference to the cantons as electing a king has been seen;<br> but see '''[[राजन्|Rājan]]''' and ''cf.'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 179;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 303;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 113.</ref> so, for example, when the people of '''[[तृणस्कन्द|Tṛṇaskanda]]'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1105> Rv. i. 172, 3.</ref> or of the '''Tṛtsus''' are mentioned.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1105> Rv. vii. 33, 6;<br> Geldner, ''op. cit.,'' 136.</ref> Again, in some passages<ref name=fx5_ve2_1105> E.g., Rv. vi. 1, 8;<br> 26, 1;<br> viii. 71, 11;<br> ''manuṣo viśāḥ,'' vi. 14, 2;<br> viii. 23, 13;<br> ''mānuṣīḥ,'' x. 80, 6, etc.</ref> the general sense of ‘people’ is adequate; as when the Rigveda speaks of the ‘Āryan people,’<ref name=fx6_ve2_1105> Rv. x. 11, 4.</ref> or the ‘divine people,’<ref name=fx7_ve2_1105> Rv. iii. 34, 2;<br> Av. vi. 98, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvii. 86.</ref> or the ‘Dāsa people,’ and so on.<ref name=fx8_ve2_1105> Rv. iv. 28, 4;<br> vi. 25, 2;<br> ''adevīḥ,'' viii. 96, 15;<br> ''asiknīḥ,'' vii. 5, 3, etc.</ref><br><br>Sometimes,<ref name=fx9_ve2_1105> Rv. ii. 26, 3, where it is opposed to ''jana, [[जन्मन्|janman]],'' and ''putrāḥ;<br>'' x. 84, 4, where in battle ''viśaṃ-viśam'' apparently refers to divisions of the host ''cf.'' also iv. 24, 4. ''viśo yudhmāḥ'');<br> x. 91, 2, where it is opposed to ''[[गृह|gṛha]]'' and ''jana;<br>'' Av. xiv. 2, 27, where ''gṛhebhyaḥ'' is followed by ''asyai sarvasyai viśe,'' which must mean a division less than a whole people. Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 159, reckons here Rv. i. 172, 3;<br> vii. 33, 6;<br> ix. 7, 5;<br> x. 124, 8;<br> 173, 1;<br> but these cases and many others are rather instances of ‘subjects’ than of a division of the tribe such as ‘canton.’</ref> however, the [[विश्|Viś]] appear in a more special sense as a subdivision of the '''Jana''' or whole people. This is, however, not common, for in most passages one or other of the senses given above is quite possible. Moreover, it is very difficult to decide whether the [[विश्|Viś]] as a subdivision of the Jana is to be considered as being a local subdivision (canton) or a blood kinship equivalent to a clan in the large sense of the word, while the relation of the [[विश्|Viś]] to the '''[[ग्राम|Grāma]]''' or to the '''[[गोत्र|Gotra]]''' is quite uncertain. In one passage of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx10_ve2_1105> xv. 8, 2, 3, ''Cf.'' xiv. 2, 27, and Rv. x. 91, 2, in n. 9.</ref> the Viśaḥ are mentioned along with the ''sabandhavaḥ'' or relatives, but no definite conclusion can be drawn from that fact. Nor does the analogy of the Roman ''curia'' or the Greek  throw much light, as these institutions are themselves of obscure character, and the parallelism need not be cogent. It is, at any rate, possible that the [[विश्|Viś]] may in some cases have been no more than a [[गोत्र|Gotra]] or clan, or different clans may sometirnes  have made up a [[विश्|Viś]], while [[ग्राम|Grāma]] is more definitely, perhaps, a local designation. But the Vedic evidence is quite inconclusive.<ref name=fx11_ve2_1105> The [[विश्|Viś]] may have been oringinally a clan settled in one place: there is no passage where ‘Gotra’ would not probably make sense;<br> Rv. ii. 26, 3, cannot be pressed unduly to distinguish ''ianman'' and [[विश्|Viś]]. Compare the phrase used of the Maruts ''śardhaṃ śardham, vrātaṃ vrātam, gaṇaṃ gaṇam,'' in Rv. v. 53. 11, where no precise sense can fairly be attributed to the words, though Zimmer sees in them a threefold division of the host corresponding to Jana, [[विश्|Viś]], and [[ग्राम|Grāma]]. The rendering ‘Gau’ has therefore little foundation.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[विश्पति|Viśpati]].'''<br><br>In the later period the sense of [[विश्|Viś]] is definitely restricted in some cases<ref name=fx12_ve2_1105> Perhaps to this sense belong the numerous passages in the Brāhmaṇas and later Saṃhitās referring to strife between the [[विश्|Viś]] and the [[क्षत्र|Kṣatra]], the clansmen and the chiefs, or the peasantry and the nobles--''e.g.,'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 11, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii, 1, 9;<br> iii. 3, 10;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhita, xix. 9 and often. See also [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 10, 9;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 3, 5;<br> viii. 7, 2, 3;<br> xiii. 2, 2, 17. 19;<br> 9, 6;<br> xiv. 1, 3, 27, etc.;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 14.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Ātindisches Leben,'' 15 ''et seq.;<br>'' Schrader. ''Prehistoric Autiquities,'' 800 ''et seq.;<br>'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 158;<br> von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literalur und Cultur,'' 32, 33;<br> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' For the Roman ''curia,'' which was apparently a collection of ''gentes,'' perhaps local, ''cf.'' Mommsen, ''History of Rome,'' 1, 72, ''et seq.;<br> Ro7mische Forschungen,'' 1. 140-150;<br> ''Ro7misches Staatsrecht,'' 3, 9;<br> Taylor, ''History of Rome.'' 11, 12;<br> Smith, ''Dictionary of Antiquities,'' 1, 576;<br> Cuq, ''Les institutions juridiques des Romains,'' 30-36, For the Greek Phratria which was probably similar in character, consisting of a union of  see ''Dictionary of Antiquities,'' 2, 876 ''et seq.;<br>'' Greenidge, ''Greek Constitutional History,'' 128 ''et seq.;<br>'' Bury, ''History of Greece,'' 69, 70;<br> Gilbert, ''Greek Constitutional Antiquities,'' 1, 104 ''et seq.,'' 210. For the English hundreds, and the supposed analogy of the ''pagi'' of Tacitus, see the references in Medley, ''English Constitutional History,^2'' 318 ''et seq.''</ref> to denote the third of the classes of the Vedic polity, the people or clansmen as opposed to the nobles ('''[[क्षत्र|Kṣatra]], [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]''') and the priests ('''[[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]'''). For the position of this class, see '''Vaiśva.'''

वि-शर
<u>'''Vi-śara'''</u> is found as the name of a disease, perhaps ‘tearing pains,’ in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1106> ii. 4, 2.</ref> Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve2_1106> ''Altindisches Leben.'' 391.</ref> thinks that the pains in the limbs attendant on fever ('''[[तक्मन्|Takman]]''') are alluded to. Roth<ref name=fx3_ve2_1106> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> sees in the word the name of a demon. The view of Zimmer is supported by the use of ''viśarīka,'' ‘rending,’ beside '''[[बलास|Balāsa]]''' in another passage.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1106> xix. 34, 10.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymas of the Athervaveda,'' 284.</ref> 

वि-शाखे
<u>'''Vi-śākhe.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]]'''<br>==Foot Notes==

विश्-पति
<u>'''Viś-pati'''</u> is a word of somewhat uncertain signification, reflecting in this respect the nature of '''[[विश्|Viś]].''' Zimmer holds that in its strict sense it denotes the head of a canton, but he admits that there is no passage requiring this sense, the only one quoted by him<ref name=fx2_ve2_1108> Rv. i. 37. 8.</ref> being certainly indecisive. In the great majority of passages the word simply means the ‘lord of the dwelling,’ whether used of a man or of the god Agni as the householder ''par excellence,'' or possibly as the fire of the '''[[सभा|Sabhā]]''' or assembly house of the people. This sense suits even the passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve2_1108> vii. 55, 5 = Av. iv. 5, 6.</ref> in which the [[विश्पति|Viśpati]], as well as the father and the mother of a maiden,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1108> So Aufrecht, ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 337 ''et seq.;<br>'' Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 308. ''Cf.'' Lanman, ''Sanskrit Reader,'' 370. Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 55 ''et seq.,'' accepts the view of the Bṛhaddevatā, vi. 11 ''et seq.'' (where see Macdonell's note), that the hymn refers to Vasiṣṭha's approaching a house as a thief! The interpretation does not affect the sense of [[विश्पति|Viśpati]], which here is clearly not the title of a cantonal chief. [[विश्|Viś]] is sometimes equivalent to '''[[सजात|Sajāta]];<br>''' ''cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 3, 2. 3.</ref> are to be lulled to sleep in order to allow her lover to approach her, for the household may well be deemed to have been a joint family, in which the [[विश्पति|Viśpati]] could easily be different from the father of the girl--''e.g.,'' a grandfather or uncle. In other passages<ref name=fx6_ve2_1108> Av. iii. 4, 1;<br> iv. 22, 3. Perhaps Rv. iii. 13, 5, is so to be taken;<br> ''cf.'' vii. 39, 2. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 22.</ref> the [[विश्पति|Viśpati]] is the king as ‘lord of the subject-people’ (''viśām''), though here Zimmer<ref name=fx7_ve2_1108> ''Op. cit.,'' 164, 165.</ref> thinks reference is made to the election of a king.<ref name=fx8_ve2_1108> But see '''[[राजन्|Rājan]].'''</ref> Or again,<ref name=fx7_ve2_1108/> the [[विश्पति|Viśpati]] is the chief of the [[विश्|Viś]], probably in the sense of ‘subjects.’(**  1) ''Altindisches Leben,'' 171.(**  9) ''E.g.,'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 1, 3, where [[विश्|Viś]] must clearly be the people or subject class, and the [[विश्पति|Viśpati]] their chief representative; we cannot from such a passage infer a formal office of [[विश्पति|Viśpati]] even as head of the [[विश्|Viś]].

विश्पला
<u>'''Viśpalā'''</u> is, according to the tradition in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1109> i. 112, 10: 116 15;<br> 11. 11: 118. 8;<br> x. 39, 8.</ref> the name of a woman to whom the Aśvins gave an iron (''āyasī'')  limb to replace one lost by her in a contest. Pischel<ref name=fx2_ve2_1109> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1. 171-173.<br><br>''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' 52;<br> Muir, ''Saniskrit Texts,'' 5, 245;<br> Bloomfield, ''Religion of the Veda,'' 113;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 110, 111.</ref> considers that a racing horse miraculously cured of a broken limb by the Aśvins is meant, but this is no more than an improbable conjecture.

विश्वक
<u>'''Viśvaka,'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1110> i. 116, 23;<br> 117. 7;<br> viii. 86, 1;<br> x. 65, 12. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' 52.</ref> called Kṛṣṇiya (possibly ‘son of '''[[कृष्ण|Kṛṣṇa]]'''’) is a protégé of the Aśvins, who restored to him his lost son, '''[[विष्णापु|Viṣṇāpu]].''' See 2. '''[[कृष्ण|Kṛṣṇa]].'''

विश्व-कर्मन् भौवन
<u>'''Viśva-karman Bhauvana'''</u> (‘descendant of Bhuvana’) is the name of a quite mythical king. He is said in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] to have been consecrated by '''[[कश्यप|Kaśyapa]],''' to whom he offered the earth (''i.e.,'' presumably a piece of land) as a sacrificial fee; in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1111> xiii. 7, 1, 15.</ref> he performed the Sarvamedha (‘universal sacrifice’), and made a similar offer; in both cases the earth refused to be given. The story seems to contain a reference to the early dislike of gifts of land,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1111> Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 47.<br><br>''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 421, n, 1;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 456, 457.</ref> but it cannot be stated with certainty that this is the meaning.<br><br>^1 viii. 21, 8.

विश्वन्-तर सौ-षद्मन
<u>'''Viśvan-tara Sau-ṣadmana'''</u> (‘descendant of Suṣadman’) is the name in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1112> vii. 27, 3, 4;<br> 34, 7, 8. ''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 431-440;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 43, 344, n.</ref> of a prince who set aside the '''Śyāparṇas,''' his priests, and performed a sacrifice without their help, presumably with the aid of others. '''[[राम मार्गवेय|Rāma Mārgaveya]],''' one of the Śyāparṇas, however, succeeded in inducing the king to reinstate the Śyāparṇas, and to give him a thousand cows.

विश्व-मनस्
<u>'''Viśva-manas'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] mentioned in two passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1113> viii. 23, 2;<br> 24, 7.</ref> and as a frined of Indra in the Pañcaviṃśa  [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_1113> xv. 5, 20.</ref> According to the Anukramaṇī (Index), he was a descendant of '''[[व्य्अश्व|Vyaśva]],''' and the author of certain hymns.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1113> Rv. viii. 23-26.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 106.</ref>

विश्व-मानुष
<u>'''Viśva-mānuṣa'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1114> viii. 45, 22. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 187.</ref> may be a proper name, but more probably merely means ‘all mankind.’

विश्व-वार
<u>'''Viśva-vāra'''</u> occurs in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1115> v. 44, 11. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 138.</ref> apparently as the name of a sacrificer.

विश्वा-सामन्
<u>'''Viśvā-sāman'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]], an '''Atreya,''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1116> v. 22, 1. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg. ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 215.</ref>

विश्व-सृज्
<u>'''Viśva-sṛj'''</u> is the name of certain mythical beings to whom, however, a Sattra, or sacrificial session, is ascribed in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xxv. 18, 1 ''et seq.'').<br>==Foot Notes==

विश्वा-मित्र
<u>'''Viśvā-mitra'''</u> (‘friend of all’) is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] who is mentioned in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1118> As son of [[कुशिक|Kuśika]] in Rv. iii. 33, 5;<br> as [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] in iii. 53, 7, 12.</ref> and to whom the third Maṇḍala is attributed by tradition. In one hymn<ref name=fx2_ve2_1118> iii. 33. Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 121, thinks the hymn too poetical to be a real composition of the reputed author.</ref> which appears to be his own composition, he praises the rivers '''[[विपाश्|Vipāś]]''' (Beas) and '''[[शुतुद्री|Śutudrī]]''' (Sutlej). There he calls himself the son of '''[[कुशिक|Kuśika]],''' and seems unquestionably to be the helper of the '''Bharatas,''' whom he mentions. The tribe, engaged in a raid, apparently came to the rivers from the east.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1118> So Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 152. Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 127, 128, takes a different view: with Roth, ''Zur Litteratur und Geschichte des Weda,'' 90, he assumes that the Bharatas were different from the Tṛtsus, and that they came under [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] from the West, but were defeated (see Rv. vii. 33, 6). But see Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 34, n. 1;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 136. Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 41, 42, still defends Roth's view.</ref> Anxious to cross them, they<br><br>^3 Rv. iii. 33, 5.  found them in high flood, but [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] by prayer induced the waters to subside. The same feat appears to be referred to in another passage of the same book of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1118> iii. 53, 9-11. This hymn is probably later.</ref> Curiously enough, Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx6_ve2_1118> Sāyaṇa on Rv. iii. 33.</ref> quite misunderstands the situation: according to him, [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] having obtained wealth by the exercise of his office, went off with it to the rivers, pursued by others. Yāska's<ref name=fx7_ve2_1118> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 24.</ref> version of the tale merely seems to mean that the king paid [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] to act as his '''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]],''' or domestic priest. For the relations of [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] to [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]] connected with their service of '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]], see [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]].'''<br><br>The Viśvāmitras are mentioned in several other passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx8_ve2_1118> iii. 1, 21;<br> 18, 4;<br> 53, 13;<br> x. 89, 17;<br> Av. xviii. 3, 6;<br> 4, 54;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 15, 1.</ref> and are also designated as a family by the term '''Kuśikas.'''<ref name=fx9_ve2_1118> Rv. iii. 26, 1. 3;<br> 29, 15;<br> 30, 20;<br> 42, 9;<br> 53, 9. 10.</ref><br><br>In the later literature [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] becomes, like [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]], a mythical sage, usually<ref name=fx10_ve2_1118> ''Cf.'' Rv. iii. 53, 15. 16;<br> Ṣaḍguruśiṣya in Macdonell's edition of the Sarvānukramaṇī, p. 107;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 117;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 343;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 158 ''et seq.''</ref> mentioned in connection with '''[[जमद्अग्नि|Jamadagni]];''' he was [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] priest at the sacrifice of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]],''' whom he adopted, and to whom he gave the name of '''[[देवरात|Devarāta]].'''<ref name=fx11_ve2_1118> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 16 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 17 ''et seq.''</ref> He was a protégé of Indra, with whom he had an interview according to the Rigveda Āraṇyakas.<ref name=fx12_ve2_1118> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka. ii. 2, 3;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, i. 5.</ref> He is also often mentioned as a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]].<ref name=fx13_ve2_1118> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 2, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 18, 1;<br> 20, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 1, 2;<br> iii. 1, 7, 3;<br> v. 2, 3, 4, etc.;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvi. 19;<br> xx. 9;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 7, 19;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xv. 1;<br> xxvi. 14;<br> xxviii. 1. 2;<br> xxix. 3;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 3, 12;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 2, 4;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 13;<br> 15, 1, etc. [[जमद्अग्नि|Jamadagni]] is often associated with him, Av. iv. 29, 5, etc.</ref><br><br>In the Epic<ref name=fx14_ve2_1118> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 388 ''et seq.''</ref> [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] is represented as a king, who becomes a Brahmin. There is no trace of his kingship in the Rigveda, but the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx15_ve2_1118> ii. 24.</ref> calls his father, [[कुशिक|Kuśika]], a king; the  [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx16_ve2_1118> vii. 18, 9. But the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 27, has a completely different version, which Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 16, n. 3, prefers, and which omits all allusion to the ‘lordship’ of the Jahnus. This shows how little stress can-be laid on this latetradition.</ref> refers to [[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]] as succeeding to the lordship of the '''Jahnus,''' as well as the ‘divine lore’ (''[[दैव|daiva]] veda'') of the '''Gāthins;''' and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx17_ve2_1118> xxi. 12, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 121;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 209, 210;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 337 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 16 ''et seq.;<br>'' ''Indian Literature,'' 31, 37, 38, 53, etc.</ref> mentions [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] as a king. But there is no real-trace of this kingship of [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]: it may probably be dismissed as a mere legend, with no more foundation at most than that [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]] was of a family which once had been royal. But even this is doubtful.

विष
<u>'''Viṣa'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1119> i. 117, 16;<br> 191, 11;<br> vi. 61, 3;<br> x. 87. 18, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1119> Av. iv. 6, 2;<br> v. 19, 10;<br> vi. 90, 2, etc.</ref> regularly denotes ‘poison’ as an antidote, for which the Atharvaveda supplies spells.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1119> Bloomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 61.</ref>

विष-विद्या
<u>'''Viṣa-vidyā,'''</u> the ‘science of poison,’ is enumerated with other sciences in the Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (x. 75). ''Cf.'' '''[[विद्या|Vidyā]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

विषाणा
<u>'''Viṣāṇā'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1121> iii. 7, 1. 2;<br> vi. 121, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 11, 10;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 3, 2, 17. Primarily a deciduous horn is meant. See Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 94.</ref> and later^2 denotes an animal's ‘horn.’

विषाणका
<u>'''Viṣāṇakā'''</u> is the name of a plant in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1122> vi. 44, 3. ''Cf.'' Viṣāṇikā in Wise, ''Hindu System of Medicine,'' 146, perhaps the ''Asclepias geminata;<br>'' Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 12, 426;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 68. But ''cf.'' Whitney. Translation of the Atharvaveda, 313.</ref> Bloomfield,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1122> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 482.</ref> however, thinks that the word may merely mean ‘horn.’ It is used as a remedy against the disease Vātīkāra.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1122> Av. ix. 8, 20;<br> Vātī-[[कृत|kṛta]], vi. 44, 3;<br> 109, 3.</ref> That  disease is of doubtful character: Zimmer<ref name=fx4_ve2_1122> ''Op. cit.,'' 389. 390.</ref> thinks that it is one ‘caused by wounds,’ comparing the adjective ''a-[[वात|vāta]],'' ‘uninjured,’ in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1122> vi. 16, 20;<br> ix. 96, 8.</ref> but Bloomfield<ref name=fx6_ve2_1122> ''Op. cit.,'' 481 ''et seq.,'' 516.</ref> shows that ‘wind’ in the body is meant as causing the disease.

विषाणिन्
<u>'''Viṣāṇin'''</u> occurs once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1123> vii. 18, 7.</ref> as the name of a tribe in the list of the enemies of the '''Tṛtsus,''' not as Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_1123> ''Zur Litteratur und Geschichte des Weda,'' 95;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 126. But Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 430, 431, altered his view, and Hopkins' criticism, overlooking this retractation, in the ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 260, 261, is so far unjustified.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 173.</ref> thought, of their allies. The word seems to mean ‘having horns,’ but in what sense is unknown; perhaps their helmets were horn-shaped or ornamented with horns. They may, like their allies, the '''Alinas, [[भलानस्|Bhalānas]], Śivas,''' and '''Pakthas,''' be reckoned as belonging to the tribes of the north-west.

विषूवन्त्
<u>'''1. Viṣūvant'''</u> denotes in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1124> xi. 7, 15.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1124> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 5, 2;<br> 7, 1;<br> v. 9, 10;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 41, 4;<br> iv. 18, 1;<br> 22, 1. 2;<br> vi. 18, 8;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 1;<br> xxvi. 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 3, 2;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 1, 2, 2;<br> 3, 14. 23;<br> 4, 2;<br> 2, 1, 8, etc.</ref> the middle day in the Sattra or sacrificial session of a year's duration. Tilak<ref name=fx3_ve2_1124> ''Orion,'' 21, 22.</ref> argues that the [[विषूवन्त्|Viṣūvant]] literally means the day when night and daylight are equal--''i.e.,'' the equinoctial day--and that this is the true sense of the word. But the theory is without probability.<br><br>^4 ''Cf.'' Whitney, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, ixxxiii. ''et seq.''

विषूवन्त्
<u>'''2. Viṣūvant'''</u> occurs in the description of the house in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1125> ix. 3, 8.</ref> The meaning seems to be tha ‘ridge of the roof.’<ref name=fx2_ve2_1125> ''Cf.'' Zimmer. ''Altindisches Leben,'' 151 (who thinks it is a metaphor from the parting of the hair);<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 598;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 526.</ref> 

विषूचिका
<u>'''Viṣūcikā'''</u> is the name of a disease mentioned in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_1126> xix. 10 = Maitrāyaḥī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 7 = [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 18 = [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 1, 5 = Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 7, 3, 2.</ref> as a result of over-indulgence in '''Soma''' drinking. It seems clearly to be ‘dyser ery,’ or, as Wise calls it, ‘sporadic cholera.’ The term apparently means ‘causing evacuations in both directions.’(**  2) ''Hindu System of Medicine,'' 330.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 275, 392.

वि-ष्कन्ध
<u>'''Vi-ṣkandha'''</u> occurs severai times in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1127> i. 16, 3;<br> ii. 4, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' iii. 9, 2. 6;<br> iv. 9, 5;<br> xix. 34, 5. It is also found in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 3, 11, 1.</ref> as the name of a disease. As rem dies against it a lead amulet,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1127> Av. i. 16, 3. ''Cf.'' ii. 4;<br> iii. 9, 6.</ref> or hemp,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1127> Av. ii. 4, 5.</ref> or a salve,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1127> Av. iv. 9, 5.</ref> or the '''Ja giḍa''' plant are recommended for use.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1127> Av. ii. 4, 1. 5;<br> xix. 34. 5;<br> 35, 1.</ref> Weber<ref name=fx6_ve2_1127> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 410;<br> 13, 141;<br> 17, 215. See Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 390, 391;<br> Grill, ''Hundert Lieder,^2'' 75.</ref> suggests that the disease meant is ‘rheumatism,’ because it draws the shoulders apart (''vi-skandha''), but Bloomfield<ref name=fx7_ve2_1127> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 282, 283.</ref> thinks that it is rather the name of a demon, like the Rigvedic Vyaṃśa<ref name=fx8_ve2_1127> Rv. i. 32, 5, etc.</ref> and Vigrīva,<ref name=fx9_ve2_1127> Rv. viii. 4, 24.</ref> both of which are similarly formed and are names of demons. Possibly Karśapha and Viśapha mentioned in one hymn<ref name=fx10_ve2_1127> Av. iii. 9, 1. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''op. cit.,'' 340. Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' thinks demons are meant: this seems the more probable view.</ref> are plants used to cure the disease.

वि-ष्टारिन्
<u>'''Vi-ṣṭārin'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1128> iv. 34, 1 ''et seq.'' According to Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 206, the designation ‘outspread’ is due to the fact that the rice mess was kneaded into furrows and juices (''rasa'') were poured into them. See [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], lxvi. 6.</ref> denotes a special sort of '''[[ओदन|Odana]]''' or porridge.

विष्ठा-व्राजिन्
<u>'''Viṣṭhā-vrājin'''</u> is a word of doubtful significance in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1129> v. 1, 12.</ref> According to Sāyaṇa, it means ‘remaining in one and the same place’; if this is right, the rendering of the  St. Petersburg Dictionary and of Bo7htlingk's Dictionary, ‘one whose herd is stationary,’ seems legitimate. But, as Eggeling<ref name=fx2_ve2_1129> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 123, n. 1.</ref> points out, the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] in another passage<ref name=fx3_ve2_1129> ''Ibid.,'' 50, n. 1.</ref> seems to treat the word as denoting a disease: thus [[विष्ठाव्राजिन्|Viṣṭhāvrājin]] may mean ‘one afflicted by dysentery.’

विष्णापु
<u>'''Viṣṇāpu'''</u> is the son of '''[[विश्वक|Viśvaka]]''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1130> i. 116, 23;<br> 117, 7;<br> viii. 86, 3;<br> x. 65, 12.</ref> When lost he was restored to his father by the Aśvins.

विष्फुलिङ्ग
<u>'''Viṣphuliṅga'''</u> denotes a ‘spark’ of fire in the Upaniṣads.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1131> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii, 1, 23;<br> vi. 1, 12;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 3;<br> iv. 20, etc. ''Cf. viṣpuliṅgaka,'' ‘scattering sparks of fire,’ in Rv. i. 191, 12 (Sāyaṇa, ‘a tongue of fire,’ or ‘sparrow’).</ref>

विष्वक्-सेन
<u>'''Viṣvak-sena'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[नारद|Nārada]],''' mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) at the end of the Sāmavidhāna [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<br>==Foot Notes==

विसल्य
<u>'''Visalya'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1133> ix. 8, 20.</ref> and '''Visalyaka'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1133> vi. 127, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' ix. 8, 2. 5;<br> xix. 44, 2.</ref> are names of a disease in the Atharvaveda. Since Shaṅkar Paṇḍit's reciters<ref name=fx3_ve2_1133> See Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 601;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 376. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 378, 384.</ref> pronounced the word as Visalpaka in all the passages, that should probably be adopted as the right reading.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1133> The commentator Sāyaṇa on vi. 127 reads ''visalpakaḥ,'' and on xix. 44, 2, ''visarpakaḥ.''</ref> Some sort of pain is meant, perhaps ‘neuralgia,’ in connexion with fever.

वि-स्रस्
<u>'''Vi-sras'''</u> denotes the ‘decay’ of old age, ‘decrepitude,’ ‘senility.’<ref name=fx1_ve2_1134> Av. xix. 34, 3, where Bohtlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' suggests for ''visrasas'' the emendation ''visruhas'' (''cf.'' Rv. vi. 7, 6);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 20, 5;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 3, 7;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 20, 7;<br> Kāthaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4.</ref> 

विहल्ह
<u>'''Vihalha'''</u> is found in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1135> vi. 16, 2. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 72.</ref> apparently as the name of a plant. The forms Vihaṃla and Vihahla occur as variants.

वीणा
<u>'''Vīṇā'''</u> in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_1136> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 4, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 5;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 6, 8.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_1136> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 4, 6;<br> xiii. 1, 5, 1;<br> ''śata-tantrī,'' ‘hundredstringed’ (like the '''[[वाण|Vāṇa]]'''), at the Mahāvrata rite, [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvii. 3, 1, etc.;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 42 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 235).</ref> denotes a ‘lute.’ A [[वीणा-वाद|Vīṇā-vāda]], ‘lute-player,’ is included in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_1136> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 20;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 15, 1.</ref> and is also mentioned elsewhere.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1136> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 4, 8;<br> iv. 5, 9.</ref> The [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1136> iii. 2, 5;<br> ''cf.'' Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, viii. 9.</ref> which states that the instrument was once covered with a hairy skin, enumerates its parts as Śiras, ‘head’ (''i.e.,'' neck); Udara, ‘cavity’; Ambhaṇa, ‘sounding board’; [[तन्त्र|Tantra]], ‘string’; and [[वादन|Vādana]], ‘plectrum.’ In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx6_ve2_1136> xiii. 4, 2, 8. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 356, n. 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 289;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 328;<br> von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 755.</ref> the Uttaramandrā is either a tune or a kind of lute. ''Cf.'' '''[[वाण|Vāṇa]].'''

वीणा-गाथिन्
<u>'''Vīṇā-gāthin'''</u> denotes ‘lute-player’ in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1137> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 9, 14, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 1, 5, 1;<br> 4, 2, 8. 11. 14;<br> 3, 5.</ref> In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] Vīṇāgaṇagin denotes the ‘leader of a band.’(**  2) xiii. 4, 3, 3; 4, 2; [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 1, 29.

वीणा-वाद
<u>'''Vīṇā-vāda.'''</u> See '''[[वीणा|Vīṇā]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वीत-हव्य
<u>'''Vīta-havya'''</u> is the name of a prince who is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1139> vi. 15, 2. 3.</ref> along with '''[[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]],''' and as a contemporary of '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1139> vii. 19, 3.</ref> though in both passages it is possible to understand the  word as a mere adjective. In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_1139> vi. 137, 1.</ref> [[वीतहव्य|Vītahavya]] appears as connected with '''[[जमद्अग्नि|Jamadagni]]''' and '''[[असित|Asita]],''' but it is clear that the legend there has no value. It is possible, though not certain, that he was a king of the '''Sṛṇjayas.'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_1139> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 105.</ref> In the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx5_ve2_1139> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 6, 5, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxii. 3;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 16, 3. ''Ibid.,'' ix. 1, 9, he is represented as being ''niruddha,'' apparently in ‘banishment’;<br> but the scholiast explains him as not a king, but a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]], which is quite possible.<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 212;<br> ''Buddha,'' 405.</ref> a [[वीतहव्य|Vītahavya]] '''[[श्रायस|Śrāyasa]]''' appears as a king: he may be identical with the [[वीतहव्य|Vītahavya]] of the Rigveda, or belong to the same line. ''Cf.'' '''[[वैतहव्य|Vaitahavya]].'''

वीर
<u>'''Vīra'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1140> i. 18, 4;<br> 114, 8;<br> iv. 29, 2;<br> v. 20, 4;<br> 61, 5, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1140> Av. ii. 26, 4;<br> iii. 5, 8, etc.</ref> denotes ‘man’ as the strong and heroic. Collectively in the singular<ref name=fx3_ve2_1140> Rv. ii. 32, 4;<br> iii. 4, 9;<br> 36, 10;<br> vii. 34, 20, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 8, 1, etc.</ref> the word denotes ‘male offspring,’ an object of great desire (''cf.'' '''[[पुत्र|Putra]]''') to the Vedic Indian. The [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_1140> xix. 1, 4. Viz., the king's brother, his son, '''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]], [[महिषी|Mahiṣī]], [[सूत|Sūta]], Grāmaṇī, [[क्षत्तृ|Kṣattṛ]],''' and [[संग्रहीतृ|Saṃgrahītṛ]]. See [[रत्निन्|Ratnin]].</ref> gives a list of eight Vīras of the king, constituting his supporters and entourage.

वीरण
<u>'''Vīraṇa'''</u> is the form in the late Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (v. 2) of the name of the plant '''[[वीरिण|Vīriṇa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वीर-हत्या
<u>'''Vīra-hatyā,'''</u> ‘murder of a man,’ is one of the crimes referred to in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1142> x. 40.</ref> The [[वीर|Vīra]]-han, ‘man-slayer,’ is often mentioned in the older texts.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1142> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 5, 2, 1;<br> ii. 2, 5, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxi. 7;<br> Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 8, 12;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 5;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 6, 8;<br> xvi. 1, 12, etc.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[वैर|Vaira]].''' 

वीरिण
<u>'''Vīriṇa'''</u> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1143> xiii. 8, 1, 15. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 70.</ref> denotes a kind of grass (''Andropogon muricatus''). See '''[[वैरिण|Vairiṇa]].'''

वीरुध्
<u>'''Vīrudh'''</u> means ‘plant’ in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1144> i. 67, 9;<br> 141, 4;<br> ii. 1, 14;<br> 35, 8, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1144> Av. i. 32, 3;<br> 34, 1;<br> ii. 7, 1;<br> v. 4, 1;<br> xix. 35, 4, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 57.</ref> As contrasted with '''[[ओषधि|Oṣadhi]],''' it denotes the inferior order of plants, but it often has practically the same sense as [[ओषधि|Oṣadhi]].

वृक
<u>'''1. Vṛka,'''</u> ‘wolf,’ is mentioned frequently in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1145> i. 42, 2;<br> 105, 7;<br> 116, 14;<br> ii. 29, 6;<br> vi. 51, 14;<br> vii. 38, 7, etc.</ref> and also later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1145> Av. vii. 95, 2;<br> xii. 1, 49;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 10;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iv. 34;<br> xix. 10. 92, etc.</ref> It was an enemy of sheep<ref name=fx3_ve2_1145> Rv. viii. 34, 3;<br> '''[[उरा|urā]]-mathi,''' ‘worrying sheep,’ x. 66, 8.</ref> and of calves,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1145> Av. xii. 4. 7.</ref> being dangerous even to men.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1145> Rv. i. 105, 11, 18;<br> ii. 29, 6. In [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 21, Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 16, sees the sense of ‘dog,’ which seems needless. ''Cf. [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], Erlāuterungen,'' 67.</ref> Its colour is stated to be reddish (''aruṇa'').<ref name=fx6_ve2_1145> Rv. i. 105, 18.</ref> The ‘she-wolf,’ Vṛkī, is also mentioned several times in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx7_ve2_1145> i. 116, 16;<br> 117, 17;<br> 183, 4;<br> vi. 51, 6;<br> x. 127, 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 81;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 14.</ref>

वृक
<u>'''2. Vṛka'''</u> in two passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1146> i. 117, 21;<br> viii. 22, 6;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 26.</ref> denotes ‘plough.’

वृक-द्वरस्
<u>'''Vṛka-dvaras'''</u> is found in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1147> ii. 30, 4.</ref> which Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve2_1147> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 153;<br> Griffith;<br> ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 297, n.</ref> interprets as referring to a battle against [[वृकद्वरस्|Vṛkadvaras]], king of the '''Śaṇḍikas.''' But this is quite uncertain. Roth<ref name=fx3_ve2_1147> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br> Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gescllschaft,'' 48, 110.</ref> and Oldenberg<ref name=fx4_ve2_1147> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 211.</ref> incline to read ''vṛkadhvaras.'' Hillebrandt<ref name=fx5_ve2_1147> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 442.</ref> suggests Iranian connections, but without any clear reason. 

वृक्ष
<u>'''Vṛkṣa'''</u> is the ordinary term for tree' in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1148> i. 164, 20. 22;<br> ii. 14, 2;<br> 39, 1;<br> iv. 20, 5;<br> v. 78, 6, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1148> Av. i. 14, 1;<br> ii. 12, 3;<br> vi. 45, 1;<br> xii. 1, 27, 51, etc.</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_1148> Av. xviii. 2, 25. ''Cf.'' Bṛhaddevatā, v. 83, with Macdonell's note (''d'').</ref> it denotes the coffin made from a tree, no doubt by hollowing it out. The Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_1148> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 40, and ''cf. Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 214.</ref> refers to the portent of a tree secreting blood.

वृक्ष-सर्पी
<u>'''Vṛkṣa-sarpī,'''</u> ‘tree-creeper,’ is the name of a species of worm or female serpent in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1149> ix. 2, 22. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98.</ref>

वृक्ष्य
<u>'''Vṛkṣya'''</u> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 1, 1, 10) denotes the ‘fruit of a tree.’<br>==Foot Notes==

वृचया
<u>'''Vṛcayā'''</u> is referred to once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1151> i. 51, 3. ''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 3, 203, who distinguishes two Kakṣīvants, but without sufficient reason, since i. 116, 17, must clearly refer to [[वृचया|Vṛcayā]].</ref> as the spouse given by the Aśvins to '''[[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]].'''

वृचीवन्त्
<u>'''Vṛcīvant'''</u> is the name of a tribe referred to once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1152> vi. 27, 5 ''et seq.''</ref> where it is clearly stated that the '''[[सृञ्जय|Sṛñjaya]]''' king, '''[[दैववात|Daivavāta]],''' conquered the '''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]]''' king and the Vṛcīvants. Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve2_1152> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 124.</ref> thinks that the Vṛcīvants and the [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] people should be identified, but this is both unnecessary and improbable; it is adequate to assume that they were allied against<ref name=fx3_ve2_1152> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 404;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 153: Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 105.</ref> the Sṛñjayas. The Vṛcīvants appear again only in the strange legend in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx4_ve2_1152> xxi. 12, 2.</ref> according to which the '''Jahnus''' and the Vṛcīvants contended for sovereignty, '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]],''' the [[जह्नु|Jahnu]] king, winning it by his knowledge of a certain rite. See also '''[[हरियूपीया|Hariyūpīyā]].''' 

वृजन
<u>'''Vṛjana,'''</u> according to Roth,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1153> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 2.</ref> denotes in several passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1153> i. 51, 15, 73, 2;<br> 91, 21;<br> 105, 19;<br> 128, 7;<br> 165, 15;<br> 166, 14, etc.</ref> the ‘settlement’ or ‘village,’ the German ‘Mark’ and its inhabitants. Zimmer,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1153> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 142, 159, 161.</ref> accepting this view, sees in [[वृजन|Vṛjana]] the ‘secure abode’ (''[[क्षिति|kṣiti]] [[ध्रुवा|dhruvā]]'') where the clan lives,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1153> Rv. i. 51, 15;<br> 73, 2 (''cf.'' i. 73, 4).</ref> the clan itself as a village community (like '''[[ग्राम|Grāma]]'''), and the clan in war.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1153> Rv. vii. 32, 27;<br> x. 42, 10.</ref> Geldner,<ref name=fx6_ve2_1153> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 139 ''et seq.''</ref> on the other hand, takes the literal sense of [[वृजन|Vṛjana]] ṭo be ‘net,’ developing all the other senses from that idea, but the traditional view seems more natural.

वृत्र-घ्न
<u>'''Vṛtra-ghna'''</u> occurs in a passage of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1154> viii. 23, 5.</ref> where in a '''[[गाथा|Gāthā]]''' reciting the prowess of '''[[भरत|Bharata]]''' it is said that he bound horses on the '''[[यमुना|Yamunā]]''' (Jumna) and '''[[गङ्गा|Gaṅgā]]''' (Ganges) ''Vṛtraghne,'' which Sāyaṇa renders ‘at [[वृत्रघ्न|Vṛtraghna]],’ as the name of a place. Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1154> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Cf.'' Aufrecht, ''Aitarecya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],'' 425.</ref> however, seems right in interpreting the form as a dative, ‘for the slayer of Vṛtra’--''i.e.,'' Indra.

वृत्र-शङ्कु
<u>'''Vṛtra-śaṅku,'''</u> literally ‘Vṛtra-peg,’ found in one passage of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1155> xiii. 8, 4, 1.</ref> is said by the scholiast on the Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1155> xxi. 3, 31.</ref> to denote a stone pillar. This improbable interpretation is based on another passage in the same [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_1155> iv. 2, 5, 15. ''Cf.'' Eggeling. ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 437, n. 1.</ref>

वृद्ध-द्युम्न आभिप्रतारिण
<u>'''Vṛddha-[[द्युम्न|dyumna]] Ābhipratāriṇa'''</u> (‘descendant of Abhipratārin’) is the name of a prince (''[[राजन्य|rājanya]]'') in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 48, 9), where his priest, '''Śucivṛkṣa Gaupalāyana,''' is praised. In the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xv, 16, 10-13), on the contrary, he is said to have erred in the '''sacrifice,''' when a Brahmin prophesied that the result would be the expulsion of the '''Kurus''' from '''[[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]], an event which''' actually came to pass. <br>==Foot Notes==

वृद्ध-वाशिनी
<u>'''Vṛddha-vāśinī'''</u> in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (v. 21) denotes the ‘female jackal.’<br><br>^1. '''Vṛśa.''' See '''[[वृष|Vṛṣa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वृश जान
<u>'''2. Vṛśa Jāna'''</u> (‘descendant of Jana’) is the name of a famous [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], who was unfortunate enough, while with his royal master, '''Tryaruṇa,''' to see a boy killed by the chariot which the king drove too fast. He thereupon recalled the boy to life. The story is told briefly in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1158> xiii. 3, 12.</ref> the Śāṭyāyanaka,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1158> See Sāyaṇa on Rv. v. 2, and the Jaiminīya version in the ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 20.</ref> the Tāṇḍaka,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1158> See Sāyaṇa, ''loc. cit.''</ref> was also narrated in the [[भाल्लवि|Bhāllavi]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx4_ve2_1158> Referred to in the Bṛhaddevatā, v. 23, apparently as cited in the [[निदान|Nidāna]]. The passage is not in the extant text of the [[निदान|Nidāna]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]. See Sieg. ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]'' 65, n. 5.</ref> and is preserved in the Bṛhaddevatā,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1158> v. 14 ''et seq.,'' where see Macdonell's notes.</ref> Sieg<ref name=fx6_ve2_1158> ''Op, cit.,'' 64-76.</ref> has endeavoured to trace the story in part in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx7_ve2_1158> v. 2.</ref> but there is a consensus of opinion<ref name=fx8_ve2_1158> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 4, 324;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 33, 248 ''et seq.;<br>'' Oldenberg, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 46, 366 ''et seq.;<br> [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 312. On the other hand, Geldner, ''Festgruss an Roth,'' 192, supports the tradition. ''Cf.'' Weber. ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 32.</ref> against the correctness of such a view.

वृश्चिक
<u>'''Vṛścika'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1159> i. 191, 16.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1159> x. 4, 9, 15;<br> xii. 1, 46;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 27.</ref> denote ‘scorpion.’ Its poison was feared<ref name=fx3_ve2_1159> Rv., ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Av. x. 4, 9. 15.</ref> like that of serpents. It is described as lying torpid in the earth during winter.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1159> Av. xii. 1, 46.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98.</ref>

वृष
<u>'''Vṛṣa'''</u> is the name of a plant of some kind in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1160> xxx. 1.</ref> Later the ''Gendarussa vulgaris'' is so styled. Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve2_1160> iv. 8, 1.</ref> has Vṛśa, which Bo7htlingk<ref name=fx3_ve2_1160> Dictionary, General Inden to Supplements, 376.</ref> takes to mean a small animal, a quite possible sense. ''Cf.'' '''[[येवाष|Yevāṣa]].''' 

वृष-खादि
<u>'''Vṛṣa-khādi'''</u> is used as an epithet of the Maruts in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1161> i. 64, 10.</ref> The sense is doubtful: Bollensen<ref name=fx2_ve2_1161> ''Orient und Occident,'' 2, 461, n.</ref> thought the expression referred to the wearing of rings in the ears; Max Müller<ref name=fx3_ve2_1161> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 107, 120, ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 263.</ref> renders it ‘strong rings,’ comparing the later [[चक्र|Cakra]] or discus.

वृष-गण
<u>'''Vṛṣa-gaṇa'''</u> is the name of a family of singers mentioned in one passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1162> ix. 97, 8. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 132.</ref>

वृषण्-अश्व
<u>'''Vṛṣaṇ-aśva'''</u> is the name of a man referred to in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1163> i. 51, 13.</ref> where Indra is called '''[[मेना|Menā]],''' perhaps his ‘wife’ or ‘daughter.’ The same legend is alluded to in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_1163> ii. 79 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 37).</ref> the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_1163> iii. 3, 4, 18.</ref> the Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx4_ve2_1163> i. 1, 16.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1163> i. 12, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 81, n. 2.</ref> but it is clear that all of these texts had no real tradition of what was referred to.

वृष-दंश
<u>'''Vṛṣa-daṃśa,'''</u> ‘strong-toothed,’ is the name of the cat in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1164> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 21, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 12;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 31.</ref> where it figures as a victim at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’). It also appears in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]];<ref name=fx2_ve2_1164> viii. 2, 2.</ref> the fact that the sneeze of the cat is here referred to renders it likely that the animal was already tamed. Geldner<ref name=fx3_ve2_1164> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 313-315.</ref> sees a house cat in the animal alluded to in a hymn of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx4_ve2_1164> i. 18.</ref> by a set of curious epithets, including ''vṛṣadatī,'' ‘strong-toothed,’ but Whitney<ref name=fx5_ve2_1164> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 19, 20;<br> Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 153, n.;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 261.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 86.</ref> decisively rejects the idea that the hymn refers to the domestic cat. 

वृषन्
<u>'''Vṛṣan'''</u> in two passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1165> i. 36, 10;<br> vi. 16, 14. 15. ''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 152, 153;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 104.</ref> seems to denote a man, with the patronymic '''[[पाथ्य|Pāthya]]''' in one of them.

वृषभ
<u>'''Vṛṣabha'''</u> regularly denotes a ‘bull’ in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1166> i. 94, 10;<br> 160, 3;<br> vi. 46, 4;<br> of Parjanya, vii. 101, 1, 6, etc. Roth renders ''vrsabhānna,'' ii. 16, 5, ‘eating strong food’;<br> but the literal sense, ‘whose food is bulls,’ will answer. ''Cf.'' '''[[मांस|Māṃsa]].'''</ref> but usually in a metaphorical sense.

वृषल
<u>'''Vṛṣala'''</u> in the dicing hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1167> x. 34, 11. ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 16.</ref> denotes an ‘outcast’; the same sense appears in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_1167> vi. 4, 12 Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> where the touch of either a [[वृषल|Vṛṣala]] or a Vṛṣalī is to be avoided.

वृष-शुष्म वातावत
<u>'''Vṛṣa-śuṣma Vātāvata'''</u> (‘descendant of Vātāvant’) '''[[जातूकर्ण्य|Jātūkarṇya]]''' is the name of a priest in the Brāhmaṇas of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1168> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 29, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 9 (with a ''varia lectio'' [[वाधावत|Vādhāvata]]: ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 215, n. 1).</ref> Vṛṣaśuṣma in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1168> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373.</ref> is probably intended for the same name.

वृषा-रव
<u>'''Vṛṣā-rava,'''</u> ‘roaring like a bull,’ is the name of some animal in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1169> x. 146, 2 =  [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 5, 6.</ref> In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1169> xii. 5, 2, 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 426: Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 90.</ref> the word occurs in the dual, meaning perhaps ‘mallet’ or ‘drumstick.’

वृष्टि
<u>'''Vṛṣṭi'''</u> is the regular word for ‘rain’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1170> i. 116, 12;<br> ii. 5, 6, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1170> Av. iii. 31, 11;<br> vi. 22, 3, etc.</ref> 

वृष्टि-हव्य
<u>'''Vṛṣṭi-havya'''</u> is in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1171> x. 115, 9. ''Cf.'' Max Mūller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 152, 153;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 108, 109.</ref> the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]], whose sons were the '''Upastutas.'''

वेणु
<u>'''Veṇu'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1172> i. 27, 3.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1172> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 5, 2;<br> vii. 4, 19, 2;<br> Kāthaka Saṃhitā, xiii. 12;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 4, 19;<br> ii. 6, 2, 17, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘reed’ of bamboo, It is described in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve2_1172> v. 1, 1, 4.</ref> as ‘hollow’ (''su-ṣira''). In the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve2_1172> viii. 55, 3.</ref> it occurs only in a [[वालखिल्य|Vālakhilya]] hymn in a Dānastuti (‘praise of gifts’), where Roth<ref name=fx5_ve2_1172> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 2.</ref> thinks that ‘flutes of reed’ are meant, a sense which [[वेणु|Veṇu]] has in the later texts. The [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx6_ve2_1172> iv. 12.</ref> couples [[वेणु|Veṇu]] with '''[[सस्य|Sasya]],''' stating that they ripen in [[वसन्त|Vasanta]], ‘spring.’ Apparently bamboo reeds are meant.<ref name=fx7_ve2_1172> ''Cf.'' Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 6, 17, with the scholiast;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 343.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 71.</ref>

वेतस
<u>'''Vetasa'''</u> is the name of the water plant ''Calamus Rotang,'' or a similar reed, in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1173> iv. 58, 5.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1173> Av. x. 7, 41;<br> xviii. 3, 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 3, 12, 2;<br> 4, 4, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvii. 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 4, 3, etc.</ref> It is called ‘golden’ (''hiraṇyaya'') and ‘water-born’ (''apsuja'').<ref name=fx4_ve2_1173> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 3, 12, 2, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 71.</ref><br><br>^3 Rv. ''loc. cit.;'' Av. x. 7, 41.

वेतसु
<u>'''Vetasu'''</u> is a name occurring in the singular in two passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1174> vi. 20, 8;<br> 26, 4.</ref> and once in the plural.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1174> x. 49, 4.</ref> It seems that he was defeated by Indra, but there is no reason to assume that he was a demon. Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve2_1174> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 128. ''Cf.'' Kaegi, ''Die Rigveda,'' n. 337.<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 55, 328.</ref> thinks that the Vetasus were probably the tribe of which '''[[दशद्यु|Daśadyu]]''' was a member, and that they defeated the '''Tugras.''' The passages are too obscure to render any version probable. 

वेतस्वन्त्
<u>'''Vetasvant,'''</u> ‘abounding in reeds,’ is the name of a place in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1175> xxi. 14, 20.</ref> not, as Weber<ref name=fx2_ve2_1175> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 32. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 69.</ref> once took it, a part of the name of '''Ekayāvan [[गांदम|Gāṃdama]].'''

वेद
<u>'''Veda'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1176> Av. vii. 54, 2;<br> x. 8, 17;<br> xv. 3, 7.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1176> ''Traya,'' ‘threefold,’ Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 5, 10;<br> xiii. 4, 3, 3;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], i. 2. 18. 20, etc.</ref> denotes ‘sacred lore.’ In the plural<ref name=fx3_ve2_1176> Av. iv. 35, 6;<br> xix. 2, 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 11, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 32, 1;<br> vi. 15, 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 10, 11, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 3, 3, 7;<br> xii. 3, 4, 11, etc. In the Brāhmaṇas the word, no doubt, has normally the sense of the extant collections, which appear under their accepted titles, '''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]], [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]], [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]],''' in the Āraṇyakas.</ref> it more definitely refers to the Vedas of the Ṛc, [[यजुस्|Yajus]], and Sāman. ''Cf.'' '''[[विद्या|Vidyā]].'''

वेदाङ्ग
<u>'''Vedāṅga,'''</u> as the name of a text subsidiary to the study of the Rigveda, is first found in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1177> i. 20.</ref> and the Rigveda Prātiśākhya.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1177> xii. 40.<br><br>''Cf.'' Roth, ''[[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],'' xv. ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 42.</ref>

वेन
<u>'''1. Vena'''</u> occurs in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1178> x. 93, 14. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 166.</ref> as a generous patron. '''[[पृथवान|Pṛthavāna]],''' found in the same passage, may or may not be another name of his, and '''[[पार्थ्य|Pārthya]]''' in the following stanza of the hymn is perhaps his patronymic.

वेन
<u>'''2. Vena'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1179> x. 123.</ref> is thought by Tilak<ref name=fx2_ve2_1179> ''Oriea,'' 163 ''et seq''<br><br>''Cf.'' Whitney, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, xciv.</ref> to be the planet Venus. But this is certainly impossible. 

वेश
<u>'''1. Veśa'''</u> is a term of somewhat doubtful sense, apparently denoting ‘vassal,’ ‘tenant,’ in a few passages,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1180> Rv. iv. 3, 13;<br> v. 85, 7;<br> possibly x. 49, 5;<br> but ''cf.'' 2. '''[[वेश|Veśa]];<br>''' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 5 (''veśatva.'');<br> xxxi. 12;<br> xxxii. 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, [[काण्व|Kāṇva]], ii. 5, 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 4, 8;<br> ii. 3, 7;<br> iv. 1, 13. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 204, who takes ''[[वेशस्|veśas]]'' in Av. ii. 32, 5, where ''pari-[[वेशस्|veśas]]'' also occurs in the same sense, and compares ''[[वैश्य|vaiśya]]'' in [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 7, 1, as meaning ‘servitude’</ref> and, according to Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1180> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 1, ''[[वेश|veśa]],'' and ''veśatva. Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 75, who seems inclined to read ''veṣas'' in Av. ii. 32, 5;<br> but Weber's explanation of the origin of the sense of ‘servant’ is adequate. Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 135, n. 4, sees in [[वेश|Veśa]] either a neighbour or a member of the same village community. ''Cf.'' '''[[सजात|Sajāta]].'''</ref> ‘dependent neighbour.’

वेश
<u>'''2. Veśa'''</u> may be a proper name in two passages of the Rigveda;<ref name=fx1_ve2_1181> ii. 13, 8;<br> x. 49, 5. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 152, 164.</ref> if so, it is quite uncertain whether a demon is meant or not.

वेशन्ता
<u>'''Veśantā,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1182> Av. xi. 6, 10;<br> xx. 128, 8, 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 12, 1.</ref> '''Veśantī,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1182> Av. i. 3, 7.</ref> '''[[वेशान्ता|Veśāntā]],'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1182> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 3, 11.</ref> all denote a ‘pond’ or ‘tank.’ ''Cf.'' '''[[वैशन्त|Vaiśanta]].'''

वेशस्
<u>'''Veśas.'''</u> See 1. '''[[वेश|Veśa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वेशान्ता
<u>'''Veśāntā.'''</u> See '''[[वेशन्ता|Veśantā]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वेशी
<u>'''Veśī'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1185> vii. 18, 17. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 264, n.</ref> seems to denote a ‘needle.’

वेश्मन्
<u>'''Veśman,'''</u> ‘house,’ occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1186> x. 107, 10;<br> 146, 3.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1186> Av. v. 17, 13;<br> ix. 6, 30;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 24, 6, etc. In Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 2, 14, the single house (''eka-[[वेश्मन्|veśman]]'') of the king is contrasted with the numerous dwellings of the people.</ref> It denotes the house as the place where a man is ‘settled’ (''[[विश्|viś]]''). 

वेश्य
<u>'''Veśya'''</u> in two passages of the Rigveda (iv. 26, 3; vi. 61, 14) seems to denote the relation of ‘dependence’ rather than ‘neighbourhood.’ ''Cf.'' 1. '''[[वेश|Veśa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वेष्क
<u>'''Veṣka'''</u> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 8, 1, 15) denotes the ‘noose’ for strangling the sacrificial animal. See '''[[ब्लेष्क|Bleṣka]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वेहत्
<u>'''Vehat'''</u> seems to mean a ‘cow that miscarries.’ It is mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1189> xii. 4, 37 ''et seq.'' In iii. 23, 1, a woman is called ''[[वेहत्|vehat]].''</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1189> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 27;<br> xxiv. 1, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 5, 3, etc. In Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 4, 4, 6, Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 195, adopts the sense ‘a cow desiring the bull.’ But ''cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 127.</ref>

वैकर्ण
<u>'''Vaikarṇa'''</u> occurs but once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1190> vii. 18, 11.</ref> in the description of the '''[[दाशराज्ञ|Dāśarājña]],''' where '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]]''' is stated to have overthrown the twenty-one tribes (''janān'') of the kings or folk of the two Vaikarṇas. Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve2_1190> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 103.</ref> conjectures that they were a joint people, the '''Kuru-Krivis:''' this is quite possible, and even probable. Vikarṇa as the name of a people is found in the Mahābhārata,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1190> vi. 2105.</ref> and a lexicographer<ref name=fx4_ve2_1190> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 261 ''et seq.,'' who sees in Vaikarṇau the two [[वैकर्ण|Vaikarṇa]] kings.</ref> places the Vikarṇas in Kaśmīr, a reminiscence probably of a real settlement of the Kurus in that country. ''Cf.'' '''[[उत्तर कुरु|Uttara Kuru]].'''

वैखानस
<u>'''Vaikhānasa'''</u> is the name of a mythical group of [[ऋषिस्|Ṛṣis]] who are said in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1191> xiv. 4, 7.</ref> to have been slain at '''[[मुनिमरण|Munimaraṇa]]''' by '''[[रहस्यु देवमलिम्लुच्|Rahasyu Devamalimluc]],''' and who are mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka also.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1191> i. 23, 3 (''Indische Studien,'' 1, 78).</ref> An individual [[वैखानस|Vaikhānasa]] is '''[[पुरुहन्मन्|Puruhanman]].'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1191> xiv. 9, 29.</ref> 

वैजान
<u>'''Vaijāna,'''</u> ‘descendant of Vijāna,’ is Sāyaṇa's version of the patronymic of '''Vṛśa''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1192> xiii. 3, 12.</ref> The real reading is ''vai Jānaḥ,'' as pointed out by Weber.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1192> ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 32.</ref>

वैट्टभटी-पुत्र
<u>'''Vaiṭṭabhaṭī-putra'''</u> is the name in the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 5, 2) of a teacher, a pupil of '''Kāraśakeyīputra,''' ''Cf.'' '''[[वैदभृतीपुत्र|Vaidabhṛtīputra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वैडव
<u>'''Vaiḍava,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Vīḍu,'''’ is the patronymic of a '''Vaisiṣṭha''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xi. 8, 14), where he is said to have been the seer of a Sāman or Chant.<br>==Foot Notes==

वैदूर्य
<u>'''Vaidūrya,'''</u> ‘beryl,’ is first '''found in''' the late Adbhuta [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1195> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 40;<br> ''Omina und Portenta,'' 325 ''et seq.''</ref>

वैतरण
<u>'''Vaitaraṇa'''</u> occurs once in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1196> x. 61, 17.</ref> Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_1196> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 2.</ref> thinks the word is a patronymic, but it seems rather<ref name=fx3_ve2_1196> Ludwig, Translation of the Rig. veda, 3, 165;<br> Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 457, n.</ref> to be an adjective in the sense of ‘belonging to Vitaraṇa’ used of Agni, like Agni of '''[[भरत|Bharata]]''' or of '''[[वध्र्य्अश्व|Vadhryaśva]].'''

वैतहव्य
<u>'''Vaitahavya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[वीतहव्य|Vītahavya]],'''’ is the name of a family who are said in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1197> v. 18, 10. 11;<br> 19, 1.</ref> to have come to ruin because they devoured a Brahmin's cow. They are said to be '''Sṛñjayas,''' but as the exact form of the legend here referred to does not occur elsewhere, its authenticity is open to some doubt.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1197> Moomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 434.</ref> According to Zimmer,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1197> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 132.</ref> [[वैतहव्य|Vaitahavya]] is a mere epithet of the Sṛñjayas, but this is not probable<ref name=fx4_ve2_1197> ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 405;<br> Weber ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 233.</ref> in view of the existence of a [[वीतहव्य|Vītahavya]]. 

वैद
<u>'''Vaida,'''</u> ‘descendant of Vida,’ is the patronymic of '''[[हिरण्यदन्त्|Hiraṇyadant]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1198> iii. 6, 4;<br> Āśvalāyana Śranta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 10, 9.</ref> and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1198> ii. 1, 5.</ref> The word is also written Baida.

वैदथिन
<u>'''Vaidathina,'''</u> ‘descendant of Vidathin,’ is the patronymic of '''[[ऋजिश्वन्|Ṛjiśvan]]''' in the Rigveda (iv. 16, 11; v. 29, 13).<br>==Foot Notes==

वैदद्-अश्वि
<u>'''Vaidad-aśvi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Vidadaśva,’ is the patronymic of [[तरन्त|Taranta]] in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1200> v. 61, 10.</ref> In the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1200> xiii. 7, 12. ''Cf.'' Śāṭyāyanaka in Sāyaṇa on Rv. ix. 58, 3.</ref> and the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_1200> i. 151;<br> iii. 139, where Vaitadaśvi is the form. ''Cf.'' Ārṣeya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], p. 54 (ed. Burnell).<br><br>''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 360;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesell schaft,'' 42, 232, n.;<br> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 354;<br> Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 62 ''et seq.''.</ref> the Vaidadaśvis are [[तरन्त|Taranta]] and '''Purumīlha.''' The latter is not a [[वैदद्अश्वि|Vaidadaśvi]] in the Rigveda, a clear sign of the worthlessness of the legends relative to these two men in the Brāhmaṇas.

वैदभृती-पुत्र
<u>'''Vaidabhṛtī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of Vedabhṛt,’ is the name of a teacher in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 4, 32). ''Cf.'' '''[[वैट्टभटीपुत्र|Vaiṭṭabhaṭīputra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वैदर्भ
<u>'''Vaidarbha,'''</u> ‘prince of [[विदर्भ|Vidarbha]],’ is applied to '''Bhīma''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 34, 9).<br>==Foot Notes==

वैदर्भि
<u>'''Vaidarbhi,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[विदर्भ|Vidarbha]],'''’ is the patronymic of a '''[[भार्गव|Bhārgava]]''' in the [[प्रश्न|Praśna]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (i. 1; ii. 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

वैदेह
<u>'''Vaideha,'''</u> ‘prince of [[विदेह|Videha]],’ is the title of '''[[जनक|Janaka]]''' and of '''[[नमी साप्य|Namī Sāpya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वैधस
<u>'''Vaidhasa,'''</u> ‘descendant of Vedhas,’ is the patronymic of '''Hariścandra''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Brāhmana (vii. 13, 1) and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xv. 17. 1). <br>==Foot Notes==

वैन्य
<u>'''Vainya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Vena,'''’ is the patronymic of the mythic '''[[पृथि|Pṛthi]], Pṛthī,''' or '''[[पृथु|Pṛthu]].'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1206> Rv. viii. 9, 10;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 20;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. v. 3, 5, 4, etc.</ref>

वैपश्चित
<u>'''Vaipaścita'''</u> (‘descendant of '''Vipaścit'''’) '''[[दार्ढ-जयन्ति|Dārḍha-jayanti]]''' (‘descendant of '''[[दृढजयन्त|Dṛḍhajayanta]]'''’) '''[[गुप्त|Gupta]] [[लौहित्य|Lauhitya]]''' (‘descendant of '''[[लोहित|Lohita]]'''’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[वैपश्चित|Vaipaścita]] [[दार्ढजयन्ति|Dārḍhajayanti]] [[दृढजयन्त|Dṛḍhajayanta]] [[लौहित्य|Lauhitya]],''' in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 42, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

वैपश्चित
<u>'''Vaipaścita'''</u> (‘descendant of '''Vipaścit'''’) '''[[दार्ढजयन्ति|Dārḍhajayanti]]''' (‘descendant of '''Dṛdhajayanta'''’) '''[[दृढजयन्त|Dṛḍhajayanta]] [[लौहित्य|Lauhitya]]''' (‘descendant of Lohita’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[विपश्चित् दृढजयन्त लौहित्य|Vipaścit <a class="pada_vei" href="दृढजयन्त">Dṛḍhajayanta]] Lauhitya»,''' in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 42, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

वैयश्व
<u>'''Vaiyaśva,'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[व्य्अश्व|Vyaśva]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''[[विश्वमनस्|Viśvamanas]]''' in the Rigveda (viii. 23, 24, 24, 23; 26, 11).<br>==Foot Notes==

वैयाघ्रपदी-पुत्र
<u>'''Vaiyāghrapadī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of Vyāghrapad,’ is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[काण्वी-पुत्र|Kāṇvī-putra]],''' in the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 5, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

वैयाघ्र-पद्य
<u>'''Vaiyāghra-padya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Vyāghrapad,’ is the patronymic of '''Indradyumna [[भाल्लवेय|Bhāllaveya]]''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1211> x. 6, 1, 8.</ref> and the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_1211> v. 14, 1.</ref> of '''[[बुडिल आश्वतराश्वि|Buḍila Āśvatarāśvi]]''' in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_1211> v. 16, 1.</ref> and of '''Gośruti''' in that [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_1211> v. 2, 3.</ref> and in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1211> ix. 7 (Gośruta-[[वैयाघ्रपद्य|vaiyāghrapadya]] as a compound).</ref> In the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx6_ve2_1211> iii. 40, 1;<br> iv. 16. 1.</ref> the patronymic is applied to '''[[राम क्रातुजातेय|Rāma Krātujāteya]].''' 

वैयास्क
<u>'''Vaiyāska'''</u> is read in one passage of the Rigveda Prātiśākhya,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1212> xvii. 25.</ref> as the name of an authority on the metres of the Rigveda. Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_1212> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> is clearly right in thinking that '''[[यास्क|Yāska]]''' is meant.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1212> The name not being a patronymic from Viyāska, but standing for ''vai Yāskaḥ, Cf.'' '''[[वैजान|Vaijāna]].'''</ref>

वैर
<u>'''Vaira'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1213> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 1, 12. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 5, 2, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ix. 2;<br> Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitā, viii. 5;<br> Maitrāyaṇī, Saṃhitā, i. 7, 5, all of which have ''vīram'' for ''vairam,'' perhaps wrongly.</ref> and '''[[वैर|Vaira]]-deya'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1213> Rv. v. 61, 8 (on the exact sense of which, ''cf.'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 361;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 92;<br> Oldenberg, ''RgvedaNoten,'' 1, 354);<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā xxiii. 8;<br> xxviii. 2. 3. 6.</ref> seem to have in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas the definite and technical sense of ‘wergeld,’ the money to be paid for killing a man as a compensation to his relatives. This view is borne out by the Sūtras of Āpastamba<ref name=fx3_ve2_1213> i. 9, 24, 1-4.</ref> and [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_1213> i. 10, 19, 1, 2.</ref> Both prescribe the scale of 1,000 cows for a '''[[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]],'''<ref name=fx5_ve2_1213> The crime of slaying a Brahmin is too heinous for a wergeld. See Āpastamba, i. 9, 24, 7 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]], i. 10, 18, 18.</ref> 100 for a '''[[वैश्य|Vaiśya]],''' 10 for a '''[[शूद्र|Śūdra]],''' and a bull over and above in each case. Āpastamba leaves the destination of the payment vague, but [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] assigns it to the king. It is reasonable to suppose that the cows were intended for the relations, and the bull was a present to the king for his intervention to induce the injured relatives to abandon the demand for the life of the offender. The Āpastamba [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx6_ve2_1213> i. 9, 24, 5.</ref> allows the same scale of wergeld for women, but the [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx7_ve2_1213> i. 10, 19, 3.</ref> puts them on a level with men of the [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] caste only, except in one special case. The payment is made for the purpose of ''[[वैर|vaira]]-yātana'' or ''[[वैर|vaira]]-niryātana,'' ‘requital of enmity,’ ‘expiation.’<br><br>The Rigveda<ref name=fx8_ve2_1213> ii. 32, 4.</ref> preserves, also, the important notice that a man's wergeld was a hundred (cows), for it contains the epithet ''śata-[[दाय|dāya]],'' ‘one whose wergeld is a hundred.’ No doubt the values varied, but in the case of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]]''' the amount is a hundred (cows) in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx9_ve2_1213> vii. 15, 7.</ref> In the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx10_ve2_1213> See n. 1. The word is not found in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]].</ref> ''śata-[[दाय|dāya]]'' again appears. <br><br>The fixing of the price shows that already public opinion, and perhaps the royal authority, was in Rigvedic times diminishing the sphere of private revenge; on the other hand, the existence of the system shows how weak was the criminal authority of the king (''cf.'' '''[[धर्म|Dharma]]''').<br><br>''Cf.'' Roth, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 41, 672676; Bühler and von Schroeder, ''Festgruss an Roth,'' 44-52; Bühler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 2, 78, 79; 14, 201 Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 402 Jolly, ''Recht und Sitte,'' 131, 132; Delbrück in Leist, ''Altarisches Jus Gentium,'' 297.

वैर-हत्य
<u>'''Vaira-hatya,'''</u> ‘manslaughter,’ is mentioned in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā (xxx. 13) and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 5, 9, 5). ''Cf.'' '''Vīrahan.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वै-राज्य
<u>'''Vai-rājya.'''</u> See '''[[राज्य|Rājya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वैरूप
<u>'''Vairūpa,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[विरूप|Virūpa]],’ is the patronymic of '''Aṣṭādaṃṣṭra''' in the Pañcavimśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 9, 21).<br>==Foot Notes==

वैशन्त
<u>'''Vaiśanta'''</u> is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1217> vii. 33, 2.</ref> of a prince whose offering Indra is said to have deserted for that of '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]]''' through the aid of the '''Vasiṣṭhas.''' Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve2_1217> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 173.</ref> thinks that the name is Veśanta, and that he was a priest of the '''[[पृथु|Pṛthu]]-Parśus;''' Griffith<ref name=fx3_ve2_1217> ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 24, n. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 130.</ref> says that probably a river is meant, but neither of these views is plausible.

वैशंपायन
<u>'''Vaiśaṃpāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Viśaṃpa,’ is the name of a teacher, famous later, but in the earlier Vedic literature known only to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka (i. 7, 5) and the [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] Sūtras.<br>==Foot Notes==

वै-शालेय
<u>'''Vai-śāleya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Viśāla,’ is the patronymic of the mythic '''Takṣaka''' in the Atharvaveda (viii. 10, 29).<br>==Foot Notes==

वैशी-पुत्र
<u>'''Vaiśī-putra,'''</u> ‘the son of a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] wife,’ is mentioned in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1220> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 9, 7, 3;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 2.</ref> 

वैश्य
<u>'''Vaiśya'''</u> denotes a man, not so much of the people, as of the subject class, distinct from the ruling noble ('''[[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]''') and the '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],''' the higher strata of the Āryan community on the one side, and from the aboriginal '''[[शूद्र|Śūdra]]''' on the other. The name is first found in the [[पुरुष|Puruṣa]]-[[सूक्त|sūkta]] (‘hymn of man’) in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1221> x. 90, 12.</ref> and then frequently from the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1221> v. 17. 9.</ref> onwards,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1221> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 5. etc. See [[वर्ण|Varṇa]].</ref> sometimes in the form of Viśya.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1221> Av. vi. 13, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 48, etc.</ref><br><br>The [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] plays singularly little part in Vedic literature, which has much to say of [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] and Brahmin. His characteristics are admirably summed up in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_1221> vii. 29. ''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 439.</ref> in the adjectives ''anyasya bali-kṛt,'' ‘tributary to another’; ''anyasyādya,'' ‘to be lived upon by another’; and ''yathākāmajyeyaḥ,'' ‘to be oppressed at will.’ He was unquestionably taxed by the king ('''[[राजन्|Rājan]]'''), who no doubt assigned to his retinue the right of support by the people, so that the Kṣatriyas grew more and more to depend on the services rendered to them by the Vaiśyas. But the [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] was not a slave: he could not be killed by the king or anyone else without the slayer incurring risk and the payment of a wergeld ('''[[वैर|Vaira]]'''), which even in the Brahmin books extends to 100 cows for a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]]. Moreover, though the [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] could be expelled by the king at pleasure, he cannot be said to have been without property in his land. Hopkins<ref name=fx6_ve2_1221> ''India, Old and New,'' 222 ''et seq.''</ref> thinks it is absurd to suppose that he could really be a landowner when he was subject to removal at will, but this is to ignore the fact that normally the king could not remove the landowner, and that kings were ultimately dependent on the people, as the tales of exiled kings show.<br><br>On the other hand, Hopkins<ref name=fx7_ve2_1221> ''Op. cit.,'' 210 ''et seq.''</ref> is clearly right in holding that the [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] was really an agriculturist, and that Vedic society was not merely a landholding aristocracy, superimposed upon an agricultural aboriginal stock, as Baden Powell<ref name=fx8_ve2_1221> ''Indian Village Community,'' 190 ''et seq.''</ref> urged. Without ignoring the possibility that the Dravidians were agriculturists, there is no reason to deny that the Āryans were  so likewise, and the goad of the plougher was the mark of a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] in life<ref name=fx9_ve2_1221> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 1.</ref> and in death.<ref name=fx10_ve2_1221> [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], lxxx.</ref> It would be absurd to suppose that the Āryan Vaiśyas did not engage in industry and commerce (''cf.'' '''[[पणि|Paṇi]], [[वणिज्|Vaṇij]]'''), but pastoral pursuits and agriculture must have been their normal occupations.<br><br>In war the Vaiśyas must have formed the bulk of the force under the [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]] leaders (see '''[[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]'''). But like the Homeric commoners, the Vaiśyas may well have done little of the serious fighting, being probably ill-provided with either body armour or offensive weapons.<br><br>That the Vaiśyas were engaged in the intellectual life of the day is unlikely; nor is there any tradition, corresponding to that regarding the Kṣatriyas, of their having taken part in the evolution of the doctrine of [[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]], the great philosophic achievement of the age. The aim of the Vaiśya's ambition was, according to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx11_ve2_1221> ii. 5, 4, 4.</ref> to become a '''Grāmaṇī,''' or village headman, a post probably conferred by the king on wealthy Vaiśyas, of whom no doubt there were many. It is impossible to say if in Vedic times a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] could attain to nobility or become a Brahmin. No instance can safely be quoted in support of such a view,<ref name=fx12_ve2_1221> Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 55 ''et seq.,'' argues to the contrarya from Buddhist evidence;<br> but this has no cogency for the Vedic period, and much, if not all, of it is hardly in point as concerns this issue.</ref> though such changes of status may have taken place (see '''[[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]]''' and '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]]''').<br><br>It is denied by Fick<ref name=fx13_ve2_1221> ''Die sociale Gliederung,'' 163, ''et seq.''</ref> that the Vaiśyas were ever a caste, and the denial is certainly based on good grounds if it is held that a caste means a body within which marriage is essential, and which follows a hereditary occupation (''cf.'' '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]]'''). But it would be wrong<ref name=fx14_ve2_1221> ''Cf. Indian Empire,'' 1, 347.</ref> to suppose that the term [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] was merely applied by theorists to the people who were not nobles or priests. It must have been an early appellation of a definite class which was separate from the other classes, and properly to be compared with them. Moreover, though there were differences among Vaiśyas, there were equally differences among Kṣatriyas and Brāhmanas, and it is impossible to deny  the Vaiśyas' claim to be reckoned a class or caste it the other two are such, though at the present day things are different.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 213 ''et seq.;'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 1 ''et seq.;'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 7 ''et seq.;'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 242, 243; Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 76 ''et seq.'' (for the Epic [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]]).

वैश्वा-मित्र
<u>'''Vaiśvā-mitra,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]],'''’ is the term by which that famous priest's line is referred to in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 17 ''et seq.'').<br>==Foot Notes==

वैष्ठ-पुरेय
<u>'''Vaiṣṭha-pureya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Viṣṭhapura,’ is the name of a teacher in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] in the Mādhyaṃdina recension (ii. 5, 20; iv. 5, 25). He was a pupil of '''[[शाण्डिल्य|Śāṇḍilya]]''' and '''[[रौहिणायन|Rauhiṇāyana]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

व्यछ
<u>'''Vyacha'''</u> in ''go-[[व्यछ|vyacha]],'' the name of one of the victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1224> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 18;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 16, 1. ''Cf.'' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 4.</ref> is of uncertain signification. According to Sāyaṇa,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1224> On [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> the compound denotes a ‘driver out of cows.’ Perhaps it means a ‘tormentor of cows,’ as the St. Petersburg Dictionary takes it. Weber<ref name=fx3_ve2_1224> ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 82, n. 11. This interpretation is supported by the use of the word in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]], where it replaces the '''[[गोविकर्तन|Govikartana]]''' of other texts, See '''[[रत्निन्|Ratnin]]''' (p. 200).</ref> renders it as ‘knacker of cows,’ Eggeling as ‘one who approaches cows.’<br><br>^4 ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 416.

व्य्-अद्वर
<u>'''Vy-advara,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1225> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 4, 1, 27. ''Cf.'' Av. vi. 50, 2.</ref> '''Vy-advarī,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1225> Av. iii. 28, 2, where a worm is certainly not meant.</ref> are the names of a ‘gnawing’ (''ad,'' ‘eat’) animal in the Atharvaveda and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. ''Cf.'' also '''[[व्यध्वर|Vyadhvara]],''' which the St. Petersburg Dictionary would read throughout. 

व्यध्वर
<u>'''Vyadhvara,'''</u> ‘perforating,’ designates a worm in one passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1226> ii. 31, 4.</ref> where there seems to be no good reason to alter the reading to [[व्य्अद्वर|Vyadvara]], though Whitney<ref name=fx2_ve2_1226> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 74.</ref> thinks that it may rather be connected with ''vi-adhvan''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1226> This would mean ‘diverging from the road,’ ‘devious.’</ref> than with the root ''vyadh,'' ‘pierce.’<ref name=fx4_ve2_1226> The Padapāṭha analyzes the word as ''vi-adhvara.''</ref> The term occurs with '''[[मशक|Maśaka]],''' ‘fly,’ in the Hiraṇyakeśi [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx5_ve2_1226> ii. 16, 3.</ref> and perhaps also in another passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx6_ve2_1226> vi. 50, 3.</ref> where, however, both Whitney<ref name=fx7_ve2_1226> ''Op. cit.,'' 318, ''Cf.'' 135.<br><br>''Cf.'' also Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 316, 361, 487;<br> Lanman in Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 318.</ref> and Shaṅkar Paṇḍit read '''[[व्य्अद्वर|Vyadvara]].'''

व्यल्कशा
<u>'''Vyalkaśā'''</u> is the name of a plant in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1227> x. 16, 13. ''Cf.'' Zimmer ''Altindisches Leben,'' 70.</ref>

व्य्-अश्व
<u>'''Vy-aśva'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]], a protégé of the Aśvins,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1228> Rv. i. 112, 15.</ref> mentioned in several hymns of the eighth Maṇḍala,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1228> viii. 23, 16. 23;<br> 24, 22;<br> 26, 9.</ref> which may have been the composition of a descendant of his, '''[[विश्वमनस्|Viśvamanas]].''' In two other passages<ref name=fx3_ve2_1228> Rv. viii. 9, 10;<br> ix. 65, 7.</ref> he is referred to only as a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] of the past, and Oldenberg<ref name=fx4_ve2_1228> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlāndischen Gesellschaft'' 42, 217.</ref> points out that none of his own work appears in the Saṃhitā. The Rigveda also mentions<ref name=fx5_ve2_1228> Rv. viii. 24, 28.</ref> the Vyaśvas, with whom Ludwig<ref name=fx6_ve2_1228> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 106.</ref> is inclined to connect '''[[वश अश्व्य|Vaśa Aśvya]].''' An '''[[आङ्गिरस|Āṅgirasa]]''' [[व्य्अश्व|Vyaśva]] occurs as a seer of Sāmans or Chants in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx7_ve2_1228> xiv. 10. 9.</ref>

व्य्-अष्टि
<u>'''Vy-aṣṭi'''</u> is the name of a mythical teacher in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka '''[[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1229> iv. 5, 22;<br> iv. 5, 28 Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> 

व्या-ख्यान
<u>'''Vyā-khyāna'''</u> in one passage of the Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1230> iii. 6, 2, 7.</ref> clearly denotes a ‘narrative’ merely--viz., that of the dispute of [[कद्रू|Kadrū]] and Suparṇī. In other passages<ref name=fx2_ve2_1230> vi. 1, 27. 33;<br> vii. 2, 4, 28.</ref> the word means simply ‘commentary.’ In the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_1230> ii. 4, 10;<br> iv. 1, 6 (Mādhyaṃdina = 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> 5, 11.</ref> used in the plural, it signifies a species of writing, apparently ‘commentaries,’ though its exact relation to '''[[अनुव्याख्यान|Anuvyākhyāna]]''' must remain obscure. Sieg<ref name=fx4_ve2_1230> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 21, 34.</ref> thinks that the Vyākhyānas were forms of narrative like '''[[अन्वाख्यान|Anvākhyāna]]''' and [[अनुव्याख्यान|Anuvyākhyāna]].

व्याघ्र
<u>'''Vyāghra,'''</u> ‘tiger,’ is never found in the Rigveda, but frequently occurs in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1231> iv. 3, 1;<br> 36, 6;<br> vi. 38, 1;<br> 103, 3;<br> 140, 1;<br> xii. 1, 49;<br> 2, 43;<br> xix. 46, 5;<br> 49, 4.</ref> as well as the lion This fact is legitimately regarded as an indication that the Atharvaveda belongs to a period when the Vedic Indian had approached and entered the territory of Bengal. Later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1231> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 5, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 9;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiv. 9;<br> xix. 10;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 5, 3 Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 7, 1, 8;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 9, 3;<br> 10, 2, etc.</ref> also, mention of the tiger is quite common. The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve2_1231> v. 4, 10, 5.</ref> preserves a reference to the danger of waking a sleeping tiger. The destructive character of the animal is often alluded to,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1231> ''Cf.'' Av. iv. 36, 6;<br> viii. 5, 11, and see '''[[शशयु|Śaśayu]].'''</ref> the man-eater (''puruṣād'')<ref name=fx5_ve2_1231> Av. xii. 1, 49.</ref> being also mentioned. Like the lion, the tiger passes as a symbol of strength.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1231> Av. iv. 8, 4, 7. ''Cf.'' [[यास्क|Yāska]], [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 18.</ref> This idea is illustrated by the fact that the king at the '''[[राजसूय|Rājasūya]]''' (‘royal consecration’) steps<ref name=fx7_ve2_1231> Av. iv. 8, 4. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 92. He does not wear the skin, as Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 79, says.<br><br>''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities'' 249, 250.</ref> on a tiger's skin to win himself the strength of the animal. ''Cf.'' also '''[[शार्दूल|Śārdūla]], [[पेत्व|Petva]].'''

व्याघ्र-पद्य
<u>'''Vyāghra-padya'''</u> is a false reading in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (v. 16, 1) for '''[[वैयाघ्रपद्य|Vaiyāghrapadya]].''' <br>==Foot Notes==

व्याधि
<u>'''Vyādhi,'''</u> ‘disease,’ occurs several times in Vedic literature.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1233> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 10, 3;<br> Saḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 8.</ref> The specific diseases are dealt with under the separate names, but the Vedic texts also mention innumerable bodily defects. The list of victims<ref name=fx2_ve2_1233> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 10. 17. 21;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 6, 1;<br> 14, 1;<br> 17, 1.</ref> at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) includes a ‘dwarf’ (''vāmana, kubja''), a ‘bald’ person (''khalati''),<ref name=fx3_ve2_1233> ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 6, 5.</ref> a ‘blind’ man (''andha''),<ref name=fx4_ve2_1233> ''Cf.'' Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 2, 9;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 1, 9;<br> 13, 2;<br> viii. 4, 2;<br> 9, 1;<br> 10, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 3.</ref> a ‘deaf’ man (''badhira''),<ref name=fx5_ve2_1233> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 2, 10;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 1, 10;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> a ‘dumb’ man (''mūka''),<ref name=fx6_ve2_1233> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> a ‘fat’ man (''pīvan''), a ‘leper’ (''[[सिध्मल|sidhmala]], [[किलास|kilāsa]]''),<ref name=fx7_ve2_1233> ''[[किलास|Kilāsa]]'' also in [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 3, 17;<br> xxiii. 16, 11. etc.</ref> a ‘yellow-eyed’ man (''hary-[[अक्ष|akṣa]]''), a ‘tawny-eyed’ man (''piṅgākṣa''), a ‘cripple’ (''[[पीठ|pīṭha]]-sarpin''), a ‘lame’ man (''srāma''), a ‘sleepless’ man (''jāgaraṇa''), a ‘sleepy’ man (''svapana''), one<ref name=fx8_ve2_1233> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 22;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 19, 1, where are added the man who winks too much (''ati-mirmira''), has too prominent teeth (''ati-dantura'') or too small teeth (''ati-kiriṭa''). and who stares excessively (''ati-memiṣa''), ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 84, n. 4.</ref> ‘too tall’ (''ati-dīrgha''), one ‘too short’ (''ati-hrasva''), one ‘too stout’ (''ati-sthāla'' or ''aty-aṃsala''), one ‘too thin’ (''ati-[[कृश|kṛśa]]''), one ‘too white’ (''ati-[[शुक्ल|śukla]]''), one ‘too dark’ (''ati-[[कृष्ण|kṛṣṇa]]''), one ‘too bald’ (''ati-kulva''), and one ‘too hairy’ (''ati-lomaśa'').<br><br>In the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx9_ve2_1233> iv. 1, 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 8, 9. ''Cf.'' Av. vii. 65, 3.</ref> the man with bad nails and the man with brown teeth are mentioned along with sinners like the '''[[दिधिषूपति|Didhiṣūpati]].''' The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx10_ve2_1233> xiii. 3, 6, 5. See Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 323, n.</ref> mentions a ‘white-spotted (''[[शुक्ल|śukla]]''), bald-headed man, with projecting teeth (''viklidha'') and reddish-brown eyes.’ Interesting is Zimmer's<ref name=fx11_ve2_1233> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 428.</ref> suggestion that ''kirmira'' found in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx12_ve2_1233> xxx. 21.</ref> means ‘spotty’ as an intermixture of races, but it is only a conjecture, apparently based on a supposed connexion of the word with ''kṛ,'' ‘mix.’ In the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx13_ve2_1233> xxx. 15, especially ''avijātā'' and ''vijarjarā,'' beside ''avatokā'' and ''paryāyiṇī;<br> atītvarī'' and ''atiṣkadvarī'' are also possibly so to be understood. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 80.</ref> and the  [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx14_ve2_1233> iii. 4, 11, 1, where ''apaskadvarī'' and ''paryāriṇī'' are read.</ref> various epithets are applied to women, some of which seem to denote disease, and in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx15_ve2_1233> i. 18, 4. Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 314, understands the hymn as referring to the domestic cat, but this lacks plausibility. The sense of the other epithets there occurring is quite obscure.</ref> the feminine adjectives, ‘antelope-footed’ (''[[ऋश्य|ṛśya]]-padī'') and ‘bulltoothed’ (''[[वृष|vṛṣa]]-datī''), probably refer to bodily defects.

व्य्-आन
<u>'''Vy-āna'''</u> is the name of one of the vital airs. See '''[[प्राण|Prāṇa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

व्याम
<u>'''Vyāma'''</u> in the Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_1235> Av. vi. 137, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 1, 4;<br> 2, 5, 1, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_1235> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 2, 3, 1. 2;<br> i. 2, 5, 14;<br> vii. 1, 1, 37, where the scholiast equates it to 4 Aratnis or cubits (while the scholiast on Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 1, 9, regards it as equal to 5 Aratnis). According to the Śulva [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] of [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]], the '''[[अरत्नि|Aratni]]''' equals 24 ''aṅgula'' (= (3/4) inch). See Fleet, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatie Society,'' 1912, 231, 233, 234.</ref> denotes the ‘span’ of the outstretched arms as a measure of length. It may be estimated at six feet or equivalent to a fathom.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1235> See Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 309, n. 5.</ref>

व्यास पाराशर्य
<u>'''Vyāsa Pārāśarya'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[पराशर|Parāśara]]'''’) is the name of a mythical sage who in the Vedic period is found only as a pupil of '''[[विष्वक्सेन|Viṣvaksena]]''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teacheres) at the end of the Sāmavidhāna [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] and in the late [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1236> i. 9, 2. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 156;<br> 4, 377;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 184, n. 199.</ref>

व्र
<u>'''Vra,'''</u> according to Roth,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1237> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Cf.'' Bechtel, ''Nachrichten der ko7niglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Go7ttingen,'' 1894, 393.</ref> means ‘troop’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1237> i. 124, 8;<br> 126, 5;<br> iv. 1, 16;<br> viii. 2, 6;<br> x. 123, 2. He omits i. 121, 2, where Bo7litlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' treats the word as a feminine (''vrā'').</ref> and the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1237> ii. 1, 1, a confused passage, on which see Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 37, 38.</ref> Zimmer<ref name=fx4_ve2_1237> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 162.</ref> sees in the word (in the feminine form of ''vrā'') a designation in one passage of the village host which formed part of the '''[[विश्|Viś]],''' and was composed of relations (''[[सु-बन्धु|su-bandhu]]''). On the other hand, Pischel<ref name=fx5_ve2_1237> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 121, 313 ''et seq.''</ref> thinks that in all the passages Vrā means ‘female,’ used either of animals<ref name=fx6_ve2_1237> Rv. i. 121, 2;<br> viii. 2, 6 (female elephants).</ref> or of  women who go to the feast ('''[[समन|Samana]]'''),<ref name=fx7_ve2_1237> Rv. i. 124, 8.</ref> or courtezans (''viśyā,'' ‘of the people’),<ref name=fx8_ve2_1237> Rv. i. 126. 5.</ref> or, metaphorically,<ref name=fx9_ve2_1237> Rv. iv. 1, 16;<br> x. 123, 2;<br> Av., ''loc. cit.''</ref> the hymns compared with courtezans; these senses are perhaps adequate.

व्रज
<u>'''Vraja'''</u> denotes in the first instance, in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1238> Rv. ii. 38, 8;<br> x. 26, 3, and perhaps 97, 10;<br> 101, 8. ''Cf.'' [[मेधातिथि|Medhātithi]] on Manu, iv. 45, and Mahābhārata, i. 41, 15, where ''go-[[व्रज|vraja]]'' is equal to ''gavāṃ pracārāḥ,'' ‘the pastures of the kine,’ in i. 40, 17.</ref> the place to which the cattle resort (from ''vraj,'' ‘go’), the ‘feeding ground’ to which the milk-giving animals go out<ref name=fx2_ve2_1238> Rv. ii. 38, 8.</ref> in the morning from the village ('''[[ग्राम|Grāma]]'''), while the others stay in it all day and night.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1238> ''Cf.'' Sāyaṇa on [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 18, 14.</ref> Secondarily it denotes the ‘herd’<ref name=fx4_ve2_1238> Rv. v. 35, 4;<br> vii. 27, 1;<br> 32, 10;<br> viii. 46, 9;<br> 51, 5.</ref> itself. This is Geldner's view,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1238> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 282 ''et seq.;<br> Rigreda, Glossar,'' 174. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 77.</ref> which seems clearly better than that of Roth<ref name=fx6_ve2_1238> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' But ''cf.'' Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> who regards [[व्रज|Vraja]] as primarily the ‘enclosure’ (from ''vṛj''), and only thence the ‘herd’; for the [[व्रज|Vraja]] does not normally mean an ‘enclosure’ at all: the Vedic cattle were not stall-fed as a general rule. In some passages, however, ‘pen,’<ref name=fx7_ve2_1238> Av. iii. 11, 5;<br> iv. 38, 7;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 16. Metaohorically, in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 22, Mādhyaṃdina, it is a pen with a bolt (''sārgala'') and with a palisade (''sa-pariśraya''). The sense of ‘pen’ is also possible in Rv. x. 97, 10;<br> 101, 8, and is not radically opposed to it, for [[व्रज|Vraja]] denotes the place where the cattle are fed, and can therefore be applied to the stall where they are during the night. ''Cf.'' '''[[गोष्ठ|Goṣṭha]].'''</ref> in others ‘stall,’<ref name=fx8_ve2_1238> Rv. x. 4, 2, where the ‘warm Vraja’ to which the cows resort is alluded to, and iv. 51, 2, where the Dawns open wide the doors of the [[व्रज|Vraja]] of darkness;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]]. [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 12, 2, where the [[व्रज|Vraja]] is said to be made of [[अश्वत्थ|Aśvattha]] wood. The sense of ‘stall’ is probable in Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, i. 25.</ref> is certainly meant. The word is often used in the myth of the robbing of the kine.<ref name=fx9_ve2_1238> See Geldner, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 283 ''et seq.''</ref> It occasionally denotes a ‘cistern.’<ref name=fx10_ve2_1238> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, x. 4 = [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 11, 1 = Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 7.</ref> 

व्रत
<u>'''Vrata'''</u> (‘vow’) in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_1239> Av. vi. 133, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 5, 3. 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iv. 11. etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_1239> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 2, 10. 14, 17;<br> 4, 2, 15;<br> ix. 2, 1, 18. ''Cf. ghṛtavrata,'' [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xviii. 2, 5. 6, and ''[[व्रत|vrata]]-[[दुघा|dughā]],'' the ‘cow that gives the [[व्रत|Vrata]] milk,’ Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 2, 14;<br> xiv. 3, 1, 34. etc.</ref> has the peculiar sense of the ‘milk’ used by one who is living on that beverage alone as a vow or penance.

व्रतति
<u>'''Vratati'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1240> viii. 40, 6;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], i. 14;<br> vi. 28.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1240> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 1, 3, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘creeping plant.’

व्राज-पति
<u>'''Vrāja-pati'''</u> is found in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1241> x. 179, 2 = Av. vii. 72, 2.</ref> where it is said that comrades attend Indra, as the '''Kulapas''' the [[व्राजपति|Vrājapati]], when he goes about. Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve2_1241> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 171.</ref> thinks that this refers to the heads of families being subordinate in war to the village headman ('''Grāmaṇī'''), but Whitney<ref name=fx3_ve2_1241> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 436.</ref> seems to be right in seeing merely the chieftain surrounded by the leading men, the family heads, not necessarily merely a village headman. Vrāja alone occurs in one passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1241> i. 16, 1. ''Cf.'' Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 17.</ref> adverbially in the sense of ‘in troops.’

व्राज-बाहु
<u>'''Vrāja-bāhu'''</u> is used in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ii. 9) of the ‘encompassing arms’ of death, Vrāja here apparently meaning a ‘pen,’ like '''[[व्रज|Vraja]].''' ''Cf.'' '''[[विष्ठा-व्राजिन्|Viṣṭhā-vrājin]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

व्रात
<u>'''Vrāta'''</u> is found in several passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1243> i. 163, 8;<br> iii. 26, 2;<br> v. 53, 11;<br> ix. 14, 2 (perhaps an allusion to the five tribes);<br> x. 34, 8. 12 (of dice). In x. 57, 5, the host of the living (''jīva [[व्रात|vrāta]]'') is referred to.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1243> Av. ii. 9, 2 (‘host of the living’);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 10, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 25;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 9. 24;<br> xvii. 1, 5. 12, etc.</ref> in the sense of ‘troop.’ In one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_1243> v. 53, 11. ''Cf.'' iii. 26, 2, where ''[[शर्ध|śardha]]'' is not mentioned.</ref> the troops of the Maruts are referred to by three different terms--''[[शर्ध|śardha]], [[व्रात|vrāta]],'' and ''gaṇa.'' From this fact Zimmer<ref name=fx4_ve2_1243> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 162.</ref> has  deduced that a Vedic host fought according to clan ('''[[विश्|Viś]]'''), village ('''[[ग्राम|Grāma]]'''), and family, but this conclusion is hardly warranted, there being nothing to show that there is any intention to present a distinct series of divisions. It is not probable that the word ever has the technical sense of ‘guild,’ as Roth<ref name=fx5_ve2_1243> In the St. Petersburg Dictionary, where this is taken to be the sense;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 9, 25;<br> xvii. 1, 5, 12;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 25;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 10, 2.</ref> thinks. ''Cf.'' '''Vrātapati.'''

व्रात-पती
<u>'''Vrāta-patī,'''</u> ‘lord of troops,’ is an epithet included in the names of Rudra in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1244> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 4, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 13;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 25.</ref> along with the epithet Gaṇa-pati, ‘lord of groups.’ The exact sense is quite uncertain, but the term may allude to the chief of a band of robbers, as Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve2_1244> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 179.</ref> thinks.

व्रात्य
<u>'''Vrātya'''</u> is included in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1245> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 8;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 5, 1.</ref> where, however, no further explanation of the name is given. Fuller information is furnished by the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1245> xv. 1, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_1245> xvii. 1-4.</ref> and the Sūtras.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1245> Kātyāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 1;<br> xxii. 4;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 6;<br> Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxii. 5, 4-14. See Hillebrandt, ''Ritualliteratur,'' 139, 140.</ref> which describe at length a certain rite intended for the use of Vrātyas. According to the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], there are four different kinds of ‘outcasts’--viz., the ''hīna,'' who are merely described as ‘depressed’; those who have become outcasts for some sin (''nindita''); those who become outcasts at an early age, apparently by living among outcasts; and those old men who, being impotent (''śama-nīcameḍhra''), have gone to live with outcasts. The last three categories are by no means of the same importance as the first. The motive of the fourth is hard to understand: according to Rājārām Rām-  krishṇa Bhāgavat,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1245> ''Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 19, 360.</ref> they were men who had enfeebled their constitutions by undue intercourse with women in the lands of the outcasts, and returned home in a debilitated state. But this is not stated in the text.<br><br>It seems probable that the really important Vrātyas were those referred to as ''hīna,'' and that the other classes were only subsidiary. According to Rājārām,<ref name=fx6_ve2_1245> ''Ibid.,'' 359.</ref> there were two categories of the first class: (''a'') The depressed (''hīna''), who were nonĀryan; and (''b'') degraded Āryans (''gara-gir''). This, however, is a mere guess, and devoid of probability. There seems to have been but one class of Vrātyas. That they were non-Āryan is not probable, for it is expressly said<ref name=fx7_ve2_1245> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 1</ref> that, though unconsecrated, they spoke the tongue of the consecrated: they were thus apparently Āryans. This view is confirmed by the statement that ‘they call what is easy of utterance, difficult to utter’: probable they and already a somewhat Prakritic form of speech (''cf.'' '''[[वाच्|Vāc]]'''). The Sūtras mention their Arhants (‘saints’) and Yaudhas (‘warrioes’), corresponding to the Brahminical [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] and [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]].<br><br>Other particulars accord with the view that they were Āryans outside the sphere of Brahmin culture. Thus they are said<ref name=fx8_ve2_1245> ''Ibid.,'' xvii. 1, 2.</ref> not to practise agriculture or commerce (an allusion to a nomadic life), not to observe the rules of '''[[ब्रह्मचर्य|Brahmacarya]]'''--''i.e.,'' the principle regulating the Brahminic order of life. They were also allowed to become members of the Brahminical community by performance of the ritual prescribed, which would hardly be so natural in the case of non-Āryans.<br><br>Some details are given of the life and dress of the Vrātyas. Their principles were opposed to those of the Brahmins: they beat those unworthy of correction.<ref name=fx9_ve2_1245> ''Ibid.,'' xvii. 1, 14.</ref> Their leder (Gṛhapati) or householder wore a turbrn ('''[[उष्णीष|Uṣṇīṣa]]'''), carried a whip ('''[[प्रतोद|Pratoda]]'''), a kind of bow ('''[[ज्याह्रोड|Jyāhroḍa]]'''), was clothed in a black (''kṛṣṇaśa'') garment and two skins ('''[[अजिन|Ajina]]'''), black and white (''[[कृष्ण|kṛṣṇa]]-valakṣa''), and owned a rough vagon ('''[[विपथ|Vipatha]]''') covered with planks  (''phalakāstīrṇa''). The others,<ref name=fx10_ve2_1245> ''Ibid.,'' xvii. 1, 15. The exact sense of the passages is obscure;<br> and was, as Lāṭyāyana shows, already obscure in his time and earlier;<br> the translations given are all vague. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 32 ''et seq.;<br> Indian Literature,'' 67, 68;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 31, 32;<br> Rājārām, ''loc. cit.''</ref> subordinate to the leader, had garments with fringes of red (''valūkāntāni dāmatūṣāṇi''), two fringes on each, skins folded double (''dviṣaṃhitāny ajināni''), and sandals ('''[[उपानह्|Upānah]]'''). The leader wore also an ornament ('''[[निष्क|Niṣka]]''') of silver, which Rājārām<ref name=fx11_ve2_1245> ''Op. cit.,'' 361.</ref> converts into a silver coinage. The Vrātyas, on becoming consecrated, were expected to hand over their goods to the priest. Many other details are given in the Sūtras (''e.g.,'' that the shoes or sandals were of variegated black hue and pointed), but these are not authenticated by the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<br><br>The locality in which the Vrātyas lived cannot be stated with certainty, but their nomad life<ref name=fx12_ve2_1245> Which is indicated by their name, ‘belonging to a roving band’ (''[[व्रात|vrāta]]''), ‘vagrant.’</ref> suggests the western tribes beyond the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]. But they may equally well have been in the east: this possibility is so far supported by the fact that the Sūtras make the Brahmin receiving the gift of the Vrātya's outfit an inhabitant of '''[[मगध|Magadha]].''' The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx13_ve2_1245> See Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 770 ''et seq.,'' with '''Lanman's''' additions.</ref> does not help, for it treats the [[व्रात्य|Vrātya]] in so mystical a way that he is represented as being in all the quacters. Indeed, Roth<ref name=fx14_ve2_1245> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> believed that it was here not a case of the [[व्रात्य|Vrātya]] of the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] at all, but of a glorification of the [[व्रात्य|Vrātya]] as the type of the pious vagrant or wandering religious mendicant ('''[[परिव्राजक|Parivrājaka]]'''). This view is clearly wrong, as the occurrence of the words ''uṣṇīsa, [[विपथ|vipatha]],'' and ''pratoaa'' shows. It is probable that the 15th Book of the Atharvaveda, which deals with the [[व्रात्य|Vrātya]], and is of a mystical character, exalts the converted [[व्रात्य|Vrātya]] as a type of the perfect '''Brahmicārin,''' and, in so far, of the divinity.<ref name=fx15_ve2_1245> Boomfield, ''Atharvaveda,'' 94.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' i. 33, 52, 445, n.;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 67, 78, 110112, 14, 146;<br> Aufrecht, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 130 ''et seq.;<br>'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, xxvi ''et seq.;<br>'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 216.</ref> 

व्रीहि
<u>'''Vrīhi,'''</u> ‘rice,’ is never mentioned in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1246> To take ''[[धान्य|dhānya]] [[बीज|bīja]]'' in Rv. v. 53, 13, as ‘rice seeds’ is unnecessary and very improbable, nor is there better reason to see in ''[[धान्य|dhānya]] rasa'' in Av. ii. 26, 5. a ‘rice drink.’</ref> but is frequently alluded to in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1246> vi. 140, 2;<br> viii. 7, 20;<br> ix. 6, 14, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1246> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 2, 10, 3, where it is said to ripen in autumn;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, x. 6;<br> xi. 5;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 10, 2;<br> iv. 3, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 12;<br> AitareyaBrāhmaṇa, ii. 8, 7;<br> 11, 12;<br> viii. 16, 3.4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 5, 9;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 3, 22 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 3, 13 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 14, 3.</ref> Rice seems to be indigenous in the south-east of India:<ref name=fx4_ve2_1246> ii. 3, 1, 3. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], 1, 7, 3, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 4. 5, 6, etc.</ref> this fact accounts well for the absence of any mention of it in the Rigveda. Black and white rice is contrasted in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1246> i. 8, 10, 1.</ref> where also<ref name=fx6_ve2_1246> Av. xi. 4, 13;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 43;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 10, 6, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 239.</ref> the distinctions of dark, swift-growing (''[[आशु|āśu]]''), and large rice (''mahā-[[व्रीहि|vrīhi]]'') are found. Probably the swift-growing variety is that later known as ''ṣaṣṭika,'' ‘ripening in sixty days.’ [[व्रीहि|Vrīhi]] and '''Yava,''' ‘barley,’ are normally conjoined in the texts.^7 ''Cf.'' '''[[प्लाशुक|Plāśuka]].'''

व्लेष्क
<u>'''Vleṣka.'''</u> See '''[[ब्लेष्क|Bleṣka]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शंयु
<u>'''Śaṃyu'''</u> is the name of a mythical son of [[बृहस्पति|Bṛhaspati]]. He is quoted as a teacher in the texts of the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1248> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 10, 1;<br> v. 2, 6, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 8, 11;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 9, 1, 24;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, i. 5, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Lévi, ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 113.</ref>

शकट
<u>'''Śakaṭa,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1249> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 22;<br> xi. 47;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1, 8.</ref> '''Śakaṭī,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1249> Rv. x. 146, 3;<br> Saḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 7.</ref> are rare words in the older literature for a ‘cart.’ The creaking of a cart is referred to in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1249/> as like the sound heard by night in the forest. 

शक-धूम
<u>'''Śaka-dhūma'''</u> is found in one hymn of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1250> vi. 128, 1, 3. 4, and in the [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]] [[कल्प|Kalpa]].</ref> where it is celebrated as the king of the asterisms. The word seems to mean the ‘smoke of (burning) cow-dung,’ or else the ‘smoke (rising) from (fresh) cow-dung’: it may well be, as Weber<ref name=fx2_ve2_1250> ''Omina and Portenta,'' 363;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 257;<br> 10, 65;<br> ''Naxatra,'' 2, 272, n.;<br> 293.</ref> thinks, that this was deemed to be significant of the weather. Bloomfield,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1250> ''American Journal of Philology,'' 7, 484 ''et seq.;<br> Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, cxxxiii;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 532, 533.</ref> however, considers that the word is to be rendered as ‘weather prophet,’ that is, one who foretells the weather by means of the smoke of a fire. Whitney<ref name=fx4_ve2_1250> Translation of the Atharvaveda. 377, 378.</ref> objects to this view with reason. It is not at all improbable that, as Roth<ref name=fx5_ve2_1250> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 353;<br> Caland, ''Altindisches Zauberritnal,'' 175, n. 3.</ref> believed, an asterism of some sort is meant, probably the ‘milky way.’

शकन्
<u>'''Śakan.'''</u> See '''[[शकृत्|Śakṛt]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शक-पूत
<u>'''Śaka-pūta'''</u> (‘purified by cow-dung’) is the name, apparently, of a prince, in one hymn of the Rigveda (x. 132, 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

शकं-भर
<u>'''Śakaṃ-bhara,'''</u> ‘bearer of dung,’ is found in one passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1253> v. 22. 4.</ref> where the sense is doubtful. Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve2_1253> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 510.</ref> and Grill<ref name=fx3_ve2_1253> ''Hundert Lieder^2,'' 154.</ref> see in it a tribal name, Bloomfield<ref name=fx4_ve2_1253> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 445, 446.</ref> the personification of excessive evacuation (diarrhœa), while Whitney<ref name=fx5_ve2_1253> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 259.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 253.</ref> considers that it may refer to the '''Mahāvṛṣas,''' despised as having to collect dung for fuel in the absence of wood in their country.

शका
<u>'''Śakā'''</u> is the name of one of the victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1254> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 12, 1;<br> 18, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇi Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 13;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 32.</ref> It is uncer-  tain whether a kind of bird<ref name=fx2_ve2_1254> Mahīdhara on Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> or fly,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1254> Sāyaṇa on [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 12, 1;<br> 18, 1.</ref> or long-eared beast<ref name=fx4_ve2_1254> Sāyaṇa on [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 12, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 99.</ref> is intended.

शकुन
<u>'''Śakuna,'''</u> ‘bird,’ is mentioned frequently in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1255> iv. 26, 6;<br> ix. 85, 11;<br> 86, 13;<br> 107, 20;<br> 112, 2;<br> x. 68, 7;<br> 106, 3;<br> 123, 6;<br> 165. 2.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1255> Av. xii. 1, 51;<br> 3, 13;<br> xx. 127, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 6, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvii. 53, etc.</ref> It usually denotes a large bird,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1255> ''Cf.'' Av. xi. 2, 24, as compared with '''[[वयस्|Vayas]];<br>''' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 18.</ref> or a bird which gives omens.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1255> ''Cf.'' [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 34, etc.</ref> Zimmer<ref name=fx5_ve2_1255> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 430.</ref> compares  which also is a bird of omen.

शकुनि
<u>'''Śakuni,'''</u> ‘bird,’ is used practically like '''[[शकुन|Śakuna]],''' but with a much clearer reference to divination. It was smaller than the '''[[श्येन|Śyena]]''' or '''[[सुपर्ण|Suparṇa]],'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1256> Rv. ii. 42, 2.</ref> gave signs,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1256> Rv. ii. 42, 1;<br> 43, 3.</ref> and foretold ill-luck.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1256> Av. x. 3, 6.</ref> When it is mentioned<ref name=fx4_ve2_1256> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 19, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 40;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 21.</ref> in the list of sacrificial victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’), a special species must be meant: later the falcon is so called, but the ‘raven’ may be intended; the commentator on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā thinks that it is the ‘crow.’ It is mentioned several times elsewhere.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1256> Av. ii. 25, 2;<br> vii. 64, 1;<br> xi. 9, 9;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxv. 7;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 15, 12;<br> iv. 7, 3;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1, 1, 31;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 8, 2, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 88, 430.</ref>

शकुनि-मित्र
<u>'''Śakuni-mitra'''</u> is one of the names of '''Vipaścit [[पाराशर्य|Pārāśarya]]''' in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 41, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

शकुन्त
<u>'''Śakunta'''</u> is a name for ‘bird’ in the Atharvaveda (xi. 6, 8). <br>==Foot Notes==

शकुन्तक
<u>'''Śakuntaka,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1259> [[खिल|Khila]] after Rv. ii. 43;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 23.</ref> '''Śakuntikā,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1259> Rv. i. 191, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 22.</ref> are diminutives, meaning ‘little bird’ in the Saṃhitās.

शकुन्तला
<u>'''Śakuntalā'''</u> is the name of an Apsaras who bore '''[[भरत|Bharata]],''' according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1260> xiii. 5, 4, 13.</ref> at '''[[नाडपित्|Nāḍapit]].''' Weber<ref name=fx2_ve2_1260> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 6.</ref> doubtfully reads the latter word as Nāḍapitī, an epithet of [[शकुन्तला|Śakuntalā]].

शकुन्ति
<u>'''Śakunti'''</u> is found in the Rigveda (ii. 42, 3; 43, 1) denoting a ‘bird’ of omen.<br>==Foot Notes==

शकुल
<u>'''Śakula'''</u> in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_1262> Av. xx. 136, 1;<br> Vājasanevi Saṃhitā, xxii. 28. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 97.</ref> denotes an unknown species of fish.

शकृत्
<u>'''Śakṛt,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1263> Used only in nominative and accusative: Rv. i. 161, 10;<br> Av. xii. 4, 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 19, 3, etc.</ref> '''[[शकन्|Śakan]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1263> In the oblique cases [[शकन्|Śakan]] is the base, Av. xii. 4, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 7, 23, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 236.</ref> denotes ‘dung’ in the Rigveda and later. It is clear that the value of manure was early appreciated (see '''[[करीष|Karīṣa]]'''). For the use of the smoke of dung or of a dung fire for prognosticating the weather, see '''[[शकधूम|Śakadhūma]].'''

शक्ति
<u>'''1. Śakti'''</u> is said in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1264> ii. 390 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 47).</ref> to have been the son of '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]],''' and to have been cast into the fire by the '''Viśvāmitras.''' According to Ṣaḍguruśiṣya,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1264> Sarvānukramaṇī, ed. Macdonell, p. 107, and on Rv. vii. 32.</ref> who appears to follow the Śāṭyāyanaka,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1264> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 159, n. 3.</ref> the story of [[शक्ति|Śakti]] is as follows: [[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]], being defeated in a contest by [[शक्ति|Śakti]], had recourse  to '''[[जमद्अग्नि|Jamadagni]],''' who taught him the '''[[ससर्परी|Sasarparī]];''' later he revenged himself on [[शक्ति|Śakti]] by having him burnt in the forest. The Bṛhaddevatā<ref name=fx4_ve2_1264> iv. 112 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes.</ref> relates the first part of the tale only. Geldner<ref name=fx5_ve2_1264> ''Op. cit.,'' 2, 159 ''et seq.;<br>'' more doubtfully, ''Rigveda, Kommentar,'' 89.</ref> sees in the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve2_1264> iii. 53, 22.</ref> a description of the death struggle of [[शक्ति|Śakti]], but this interpretation is more than doubtful.<ref name=fx7_ve2_1264> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 254.</ref>

शक्ती आङ्गिरस
<u>'''2. Śaktī Āṅgirasa'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[अङ्गिरस्|Aṅgiras]]'''’) is the name of a seer of a Sāman or Chant in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1265> xii. 5, 16, ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 160.</ref>

शक्वरी
<u>'''Śakvarī,'''</u> fem. plur., denotes the [[शक्वरी|Śakvarī]] verses, known also as the Mahānāmnī verses, to which the [[शाक्वर|Śākvara]] Sāman (chant) is sung. This sense seems to occur in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1266> vii. 33, 4;<br> x. 71, 14;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], i. 8.</ref> and is certain later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1266> Av. xiii. 1, 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 8, 5;<br> 6, 2, 3;<br> iii. 4, 4, 1;<br> v. 4, 12, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxvi. 4;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], x. 6, 5;<br> xii. 13, 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 5, 11;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 1, 1;<br> 9, 2, 17, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 258 ''et seq.''</ref>

शङ्कु
<u>'''Śaṅku'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1267> 1. 164. 48.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1267> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 1, 1;<br> 2, 2;<br> 6, 1, 3;<br> xiii. 8, 4, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 18, 6, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘wooden peg.’ Thus the '''term''' is used of the pags by which a skin is stretched out in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_1267> ii. 1, 1, 10.</ref> and of the pin of hobbles ('''[[पड्बीश|Paḍbīśa]]''').<ref name=fx4_ve2_1267> Bṛhadāraṇyaka, vi. 2, 13 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 1, 13 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]), etc.</ref> '''In''' the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_1267> ii. 23, 4.</ref> it may mean ‘stalk’<ref name=fx6_ve2_1267> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 1, 35.</ref> or ‘fibre of a '''leaf.'''’<ref name=fx7_ve2_1267> Little, ''Grammatical Index,'' 149, But ''cf.'' Oertel, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 228, who compares ''śūcī'' in Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 10;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 10, 3.</ref> 

शङ्ख
<u>'''1. Śaṅkha'''</u> in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1268> iv. 10, 1. See Lanman in Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 161.</ref> with the epithet '''[[कृशन|Kṛśana]],''' denotes a pearl-shell used as an amulet. In the later literature<ref name=fx2_ve2_1268> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 4, 9;<br> iv. 5, 10.</ref> it denotes a ‘shell’ or ‘conch’ used for blowing as a wind instrument.

शङ्ख कौष्य
<u>'''2. Śaṅkha Kauṣya'''</u> is mentioned as a teacher whom '''[[जात शाकायन्य|Jāta Śākāyanya]]''' criticized in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā (xxii. 7; ''cf.'' 6).<br>==Foot Notes==

शङ्ख बाभ्रव्य
<u>'''3. Śaṅkha Bābhravya'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[बभ्रु|Babhru]]'''’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[राम|Rāma]],''' in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 41, 1; iv. 17, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

शङ्ख-धम
<u>'''Śaṅkha-dhama,'''</u> a ‘conch-blower,’ is enumerated among the victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1271> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 19;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Brāhaṃa, iii. 4, 13, 1.</ref> and is mentioned in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_1271> ii. 4, 9;<br> iv. 5, 10.</ref>

शङ्ग शाट्यायनि
<u>'''Śaṅga Śāṭyāyani'''</u> (‘descendant of Śāṭyāyana’) '''[[आत्रेय|Ātreya]]''' (‘descendant of '''Atri'''’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''Nagarin,''' in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 40, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

शचीवन्त्
<u>'''Śacīvant'''</u> is apparently the name of a man in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1273> x. 74. 5.</ref> where the vocative ''Śacīvaḥ'' occurs. But Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_1273> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 108;<br> Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 489, n.</ref> perfers to read ''Śacī ca'' instead.

शण
<u>'''Śaṇa'''</u> denotes a kind of ‘hemp’ (''Cannabis sativa'' or ''Crotolaria juncea''). It is mentioned in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1274> ii. 4, 5.</ref> as growing in the forest, and as used like the '''[[जङ्गिड|Jaṅgiḍa]]''' as a remedy against '''[[विष्कन्ध|Viṣkandha]].''' It also occurs in the Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_1274> iii. 2, 1, 11 i. 6, 1, 24;<br> 2, 15.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 68.</ref> 

शण्ड
<u>'''Śaṇḍa'''</u> is joined with '''[[मर्क|Marka]]''' as a [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of the Asuras in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_1275> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 4, 10, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 6, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vii. 12. 13 ([[मर्क|Marka]] in 16. 17).</ref> and Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1275> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 2, 1, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, i, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 223.</ref>

शण्डिक
<u>'''Śaṇḍika'''</u> is found in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1276> iii. 30, 8,</ref> in the plural. According to Ludwig,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1276> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 153.</ref> the hymn is a prayer for victory over the Śaṇḍikas and their king.

शत-द्युम्न
<u>'''Śata-dyumna'''</u> (‘possessing a hundred glories’) is the name of a man who, along with '''[[यज्ञेषु|Yajñeṣu]],''' was made prosperous by the priest '''[[मात्स्य|Mātsya]]''' through his knowledge of the exact moment for sacrifice, according to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 5, 2, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

शत-पति
<u>'''Śata-pati'''</u> occurs in a verse of the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_1278> iv. 14, 12.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1278> ii. 8, 4, 2.</ref> as an epithet of Indra, who is described as alone the ‘lord of a hundred’ among men. To interpret the expression as ‘lord of a hundred gods,’ as does the commentary on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], is obviously impossible. It seems clear that there is a reference to an analogous human functionary--viz., the lord of a hundred villages, known in the later law<ref name=fx3_ve2_1278> See Foy, ''Die ko7nigliche Gewalt,'' 74.</ref> --who was probably at once a judicial deputy of the sovereign and a revenue collector, an ancient magistrate and collector.

शत-बलाक्ष मौद्गल्य
<u>'''Śata-balākṣa Maudgalya'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[मुद्गल|Mudgala]]'''’) is the name of a grammarian in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (xi. 6).<br>==Foot Notes==

शत-मान
<u>'''Śata-māna.'''</u> See '''[[मान|Māna]]''' and '''Kṛṣṇaia.''' <br>==Foot Notes==

शत-यातु
<u>'''Śata-yātu'''</u> (‘having a hundred magic powers’) is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1281> vii. 18, 21.</ref> He is enumerated after '''[[पराशर|Parāśara]]''' and before '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]].''' Geldner<ref name=fx2_ve2_1281> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 132.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 3, 139.</ref> thinks he may have been a son of [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]].

शत-रुद्रिय
<u>'''Śata-rudriya,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1282> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxi. 6;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 1, 1, 1;<br> 2, 1;<br> x. 1, 5, 3. 15.</ref> '''Śata-rudrīya'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1282> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 4, 3, 1;<br> 5, 9, 4;<br> 7, 3, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 11, 9, 9, etc.</ref> (hymn ‘relating to the hundred Rudras’), is the name of a section of the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_1282> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 1-11;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 11-16;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 1 ''et seq.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 202;<br> Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 108, 111, 159, 169, 170;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 43, 150 ''et seq.''</ref> which celebrates the god Rudra in his hundred aspects, enumerating his many epithets.

शत-शारद
<u>'''Śata-śārada'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1283> vii. 101, 6;<br> x. 161, 2.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1283> i. 35, 1;<br> viii. 2, 2;<br> 5, 21.</ref> denotes a ‘period of a hundred autumns’ or years.

शतानीक सात्राजित
<u>'''Śatānīka Sātrājita'''</u> is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Brāhmana<ref name=fx1_ve2_1284> viii. 21, 5.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1284> xiii. 5, 4, 9-13.</ref> as a great king who defeated '''[[धृतराष्ट्र|Dhṛtarāṣṭra]],''' the prince of '''[[काशि|Kāśi]],''' and took away his sacrificial horse. He was clearly a '''[[भरत|Bharata]].''' He is also alluded to in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1284> i. 35. 1 = Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 52, in connexion with the '''Dākṣāyaṇas.'''</ref>

शत्रि आग्नि-वेशि
<u>'''Śatri Āgni-veśi'''</u> (‘descendant of Agniveśa’) is the name of a generous patron in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1285> v. 34. 9. ''Cf.'' Ludwig. Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 155.</ref>

शत्रु
<u>'''Śatru'''</u> denotes ‘enemy’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1286> i. 33, 13;<br> 61, 13;<br> ii. 23, 11;<br> 30, 3 ''et seq.;<br>'' iii. 16, 2;<br> iv. 28, 4, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1286> Av. iv. 3, 1;<br> vi. 4, 2;<br> x. 3, 1, etc.</ref> 

शं-तनु
<u>'''Śaṃ-tanu'''</u> is the hero of a tale told by [[यास्क|Yāska]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1287> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 10.</ref> and often found later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1287> Bṛhaddevatā, vii. 155 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes;<br> Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 129 ''et seq.''</ref> He supersedes his elder brother '''Devāpi''' as king of the '''Kurus.''' When his improper deed brings on a prolonged drought in his realm, he is compelled to ask his brother to assume the kingship; Devāpi, however, refuses, but instead performs a sacrifice which produces rain. Sieg<ref name=fx3_ve2_1287> ''Loc. cit.''</ref> endeavours to trace this story in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1287> x. 98.</ref> but all that is there stated is that Devāpi '''Ārṣṭiṣeṇa''' obtained (no doubt as priest) rain for [[शंतनु|Śaṃtanu]] (no doubt a king). There is no hint of relationship at all.

शपथ
<u>'''Śapatha'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1288> x. 87, 15;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vii. 3.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1288> Av. iii. 9, 5;<br> iv. 9, 5;<br> 18, 7;<br> 19, 7. etc.</ref> denotes a ‘curse,’ not an ‘oath,’ as a judicial process. But that an oath of such a kind was possible as it was later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1288/> is shown by at least one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1288> vii. 104, 15.<br><br>''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 326, 327.</ref> where the speaker, possibly '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]],''' imprecates death on himself if he is a wizard, and death on his foes if he is not.

शफ
<u>'''1. Śapha,'''</u> ‘hoof,’ comes to be used to denote the fraction ‘one-eighth,’ because of the divided hoofs of the cow, just as '''[[पाद|Pāda]],''' the ‘foot’ of a quadruped, also means a ‘quarter.’ This sense in found as early as the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1289> viii. 47, 17.</ref> and is not rare later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1289> Av. vi. 46, 3;<br> xix. 57, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 10, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 3, 3, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 278;<br> 17, 47;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 259.</ref>

शफ
<u>'''2. Śapha'''</u> in the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1290> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 22, 14;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 2, 1, 16. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 458, n. 4;<br> 476.</ref> is the name (used in the dual) of a wooden implement, acting like a pair of tongs, for lifting an iron pot from the fire. It is probably so called because it resembled a hoof in being divided. 

शफक
<u>'''Śaphaka'''</u> is the name of some plant in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1291> iv. 34, 5.</ref> It is also mentioned in the Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_1291> ix. 14, 14.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 138;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 70;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda 207.</ref> where it seems to denote an edible water plant or fruit, perhaps a water nut. It may be so called from its leaves being shaped like hoofs ('''[[शफ|Śapha]]''').

शफाल
<u>'''Śaphāla'''</u> is the name of '''Ṛtuparṇa's''' kingdom in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta Sātra.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1292> xx. 12. ''Cf.'' Caland, ''Über das rituelle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 21, 36.</ref>

सबर
<u>'''Sabara'''</u> is the name of a wild tribe who in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1293> vii. 18, 2;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 26, 6. ''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 483.</ref> are classed as '''Dasyus,''' with the '''Andhras, Pulindas, Mūtibas,''' and '''Puṇḍras.'''

शमितृ
<u>'''Śamitṛ'''</u> denotes the ‘man who cuts up’ the slaughtered animal in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1294> i. 162, 9 ''et seq.;<br>'' ii. 3, 10;<br> iii. 4, 10;<br> v. 43, 4, etc.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1294> Av. x. 9, 7 (‘cook’ of the Śataudanā, or offering of a cow and a hunḍred rice-dishes);<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvii. 57;<br> xxi. 21;<br> xxiii. 39;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 2;<br> 7, 10-12;<br> vii. 1, 2;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 18, 4, etc.</ref> sometimes having merely the sense of ‘cook.’

शमी
<u>'''Śamī'''</u> is the name of a tree in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1295> Av. vi. 11, 1;<br> 30, 2, 3.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1295> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 9, 6;<br> 4, 7, 4 (for the lower ''[[अरणी|araṇī]]'');<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvi. 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 3, 11 ''et seq.;<br>'' 6, 4, 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 2, 12;<br> ix. 2, 3, 37, etc.</ref> It is described in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_1295> Av. vi. 30, 2. 3.</ref> as destructive to the hair,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1295> In the Dhanvantarīya Nighaṇṭu, p. 188 (ed. Poona), the [[शमी|Śamī]] and its fruit are said to destroy the hair.</ref> as producing intoxication, and as broad-leaved. These characteristics are totally wanting in the two trees, ''Prosopis spicigera'' or ''Mimosa suma,'' with which the [[शमी|Śamī]] is usually identified.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1295> See Roth in Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 302.</ref>  From the soft wood of the [[शमी|Śamī]] was formed the lower of the two sticks (''[[अरणी|araṇī]]'') used for kindling the sacred fire,<ref name=fx6_ve2_1295> Av. vi. 11, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 1, 15;<br> ''Cf.'' 13;<br> iii. 4, 1, 22;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 9, 6;<br> 4, 7, 4.</ref> the upper one (the drill) being of '''[[अश्वत्थ|Aśvattha]].''' The fruit of the tree is called Śamīdhānya.<ref name=fx7_ve2_1295> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 1, 10.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 59, 60.</ref>

शम्बर
<u>'''Śambara'''</u> is the name of an enemy of Indra in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1296> i. 51, 6;<br> 54, 4;<br> 59, 6;<br> 101, 2;<br> 103, 8;<br> 112, 14;<br> 130, 7;<br> ii. 12, 11;<br> 14, 6;<br> 19, 6;<br> iv. 26, 3;<br> 30, 14;<br> vi. 18, 8;<br> 26, 5;<br> 31, 4;<br> 43, 1;<br> 47, 2. 21;<br> vii. 18, 20;<br> 99, 5.</ref> He is mentioned along with '''Śuṣṇa, [[पिप्रु|Pipru]],''' and '''[[वर्चिन्|Varcin]],''' being in one passage called a '''[[दास|Dāsa]],''' son of Kulitara.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1296> Rv. vi. 26, 5.</ref> In another passage<ref name=fx3_ve2_1296> Rv. vii. 18, 20.</ref> he is said to have deemed himself a godling (''devaka''). His forts, ninety,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1296> Rv. i. 130, 7.</ref> ninety-nine,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1296> Rv. ii. 19, 6.</ref> or a hundred<ref name=fx6_ve2_1296> Rv. ii. 14, 6.</ref> in number, are alluded to, the word itself in the neuter plural once<ref name=fx7_ve2_1296> Rv. ii. 24, 2.</ref> meaning the ‘forts of [[शम्बर|Śambara]].’ His great foe was '''[[दिवोदास अतिथिग्व|Divodāsa Atithigva]],''' who won victories over him by Indra's aid.<ref name=fx8_ve2_1296> Rv. i. 51, 6;<br> 130, 7;<br> ii. 19, 6;<br> iv. 26, 3, etc.</ref><br><br>It is impossible to say with certainty whether [[शम्बर|Śambara]] was a real person or not. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx9_ve2_1296> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 103, 108;<br> 3, 273.</ref> is strongly in favour of the theory that he was a real chief as enemy of Divodāsa: he relies on the statistics<ref name=fx10_ve2_1296> Seven times in Maṇḍala i;<br> four in ii;<br> two in iv;<br> six in vi;<br> two in vii. These references show ''primâ facis'' greater reality in Maṇḍala vi than elsewhere. The references in ii. are certainly all of the mythical kind, and those in vii are of much the same sort.</ref> of the mention of the name to show that, where as he was conceived as a real foe in the hymns of the time of Divodāsa, later texts, like those of the seventh Maṇḍala, make him into a demon, as a result of the change of scene from Arachosia to India. As a matter of fact, apart from this theory, [[शम्बर|Śambara]] was quite possibly an aboriginal enemy in India, living in the mountains.<ref name=fx11_ve2_1296> Rv. i. 130, 7;<br> iv. 30, 14;<br> vi. 26, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 177;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 161;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 210;<br> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 178.</ref> 

शम्बिन्
<u>'''Śambin,'''</u> a word occurring only once, appears to mean ‘ferryman’ in the Atharvaveda (ix. 2, 6). The literal sense is probably ‘pole-man’ (from ''śamba,'' a word of doubtful signification found in the Rigveda, x. 42, 7).<br>==Foot Notes==

शंमद् आङ्गिरस
<u>'''Śaṃmad Āṅgirasa'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[अङ्गिरस्|Aṅgiras]]'''’) is the name of the seer of a Sāman or Chant in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xv. 5, 11).<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologic.'' 2, 160.<br>==Foot Notes==

शम्या
<u>'''Śamyā'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1299> x. 31, 10.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1299> Av. vi. 138, 4;<br> xx. 136, 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 7, 1;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 10, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 5, 2, 7. etc.</ref> a ‘peg,’ more particularly one on the millstone;<ref name=fx3_ve2_1299> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 1, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 1, 22;<br> 2, 1, 16 ''et seq.;<br>'' v. 2, 3, 2, etc.</ref> and on the yoke,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1299> Rv. iii. 33, 13;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 4, 25;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, 6, 8, 3.</ref> where it seems to mean the pin of wood attached to either end so as to keep the yoke in place on the ox's neck.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1299> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 5, 20. ''Cf.'' xi. 1, 6;<br> xv. 7, 6;<br> Grierson, ''Bihar Pcasant Life,'' 194, and illustration, p. 33;<br> Cuningham, ''The [[स्तूप|Stūpa]] of Bharhut,'' Plate xxviii.;<br> Caland and Henry, ''L'Agniṣṭoma,'' 49.</ref> The [[शम्या|Śamyā]] was also used as a measure of length.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1299> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 6, 2. According to the commentary on Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], v. 3, 20, the length was 32 Aṅgulas, or fingerbreadths This would be equivalent to 2 feet: ''cf.'' Fleet, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1912, 232.</ref>

शयण्डक
<u>'''Śayaṇḍaka.'''</u> See '''[[शयाण्डक|Śayāṇḍaka]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शयन
<u>'''Śayana'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1301> iii. 25. 1;<br> v. 29. 8.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1301> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 1, 2;<br> 7, 4.</ref> denotes a ‘couch.’ ''Cf.'' '''[[तल्प|Talpa]], [[वह्य|Vahya]].'''

शयाण्डक
<u>'''Śayāṇḍaka'''</u> is the form in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_1302> v. 5, 14, 1.</ref> of the name of an animal which in the Maitrāyaṇī<ref name=fx2_ve2_1302> iii. 14. 14.</ref> and Vājasaneyi Saṃhitās<ref name=fx3_ve2_1302> xxiv. 33.</ref> is written as [[शयण्डक|Śayaṇḍaka]]. Some sort of bird is meant according to Roth,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1302> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 95.</ref> but the commentator on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā equates the word with '''[[कृकलास|Kṛkalāsa]],''' ‘chameleon.’ 

शयु
<u>'''Śayu'''</u> is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1303> i. 112, 16;<br> 116, 22;<br> 117, 20;<br> 118, 8;<br> 119, 6;<br> vi. 62, 7;<br> vii. 68, 8;<br> x. 39, 13;<br> 40, 8.</ref> of a protégé of the Aśvins, who made his cow to give milk.

शर
<u>'''1. Śara'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1304> i. 191, 3.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1304> Av. iv. 7, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 6, 2;<br> vi. 1, 3, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 5;<br> xxiii. 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 4, 1;<br> iii. 1, 3, 13;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 11, etc.;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 4, etc.</ref> denotes a kind of ‘reed’ (''Saccharum Sara''). Its use for arrow shafts,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1304> Av. i. 2, 1;<br> 3, 1.</ref> and its brittleness,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1304> Av. viii. 8, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 71.</ref> are expressly referred to in the Atharvaveda. ''Cf.'' '''[[शर्य|Śarya]].'''

शर अर्चत्क
<u>'''2. Śara Arcatka'''</u> (‘descendant of Ṛcatka’) is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1305> i. 116, 22;<br> ''cf.'' perhaps. i. 112, 16;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 103, ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 150.</ref> It is very doubtful, however, whether Ārcatka is really a patronymic.

शर शौर-देव्य
<u>'''3. Śara Śaura-devya'''</u> (‘descendant of Śūradeva’) is the name of a generous prince in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1306> viii. 70, 13-15.</ref> who gave one calf to three singers. That this Dānastuti (‘praise of gifts’) is ironical seems certain.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1306> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 5-7;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 163;<br> 5. 175.</ref>

शरद्
<u>'''Śarad.'''</u> See '''[[ऋतु|Ṛtu]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शरभ
<u>'''1. Śarabha'''</u> is the name of some wild animal in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1308> ix. 5, 9. ''Cf.'' '''[[शलभ|Śalabha]].'''</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1308> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 10, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 51;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 8, 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 3, 9, etc.</ref> In the '''classical''' literature it is a fabulous, eight-legged beast, dwelling in the snowy mountains, a foe of lions and elephants: the commentator Mahīdhara sees this sense, but without reason, in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā. The  animal is spoken of as akin to the goat;<ref name=fx3_ve2_1308> Av., ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 52, n. 1, accepts the traditional rendering.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 89.</ref> it was probably a kind of deer.

शरभ
<u>'''2. Śarabha'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1309> viii. 100, 6. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 163.</ref>

शरव्या
<u>'''Śaravyā,'''</u> ‘arrow-shot,’ is an expression found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1310> vi. 75, 16;<br> x. 87, 13.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1310> Av. i. 19, 1. 3;<br> v. 18, 9;<br> xi. 10, 6;<br> xii. 5, 25, 29;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 5. 1, 1, etc.</ref>

शराव
<u>'''Śarāva'''</u> is a measure of corn in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1311> ''Saptadaśa-[[शराव|śarāva]],'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 4, 5;<br> 6, 8;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, 4, 12.</ref>

शरीर
<u>'''Śarīra,'''</u> ‘body,’ is a word of frequent occurrence in Vedic literature.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1312> Rv. i. 32, 10;<br> x. 16, 1, etc.;<br> Av. v. 9, 7;<br> xviii. 3, 9, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 55;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 7, 2, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 13;<br> 14, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 1, 4, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 1, 8.</ref> The interest of the Vedic Indians seems early to have been attracted to the consideration of questions connected with the anatomy of the body. Thus a hymn of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1312> x. 2.</ref> enumerates many parts of the body with some approach to accuracy and orderly arrangement.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1312> ''Cf.'' Hoernle, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1907, 10-12;<br> ''Osteology,'' 109-111, 242.</ref> It mentions the heels (''pārṣṇī''), the flesh (''[[मांस|māṃsa]]''), the ankle-bones (''gulphau''), the fingers (''aṅgulīḥ''), the apertures (''kha''), the two metatarsi (''uchlakau''), the tarsus (''[[प्रतिष्ठा|pratiṣṭhā]]''), the two knee-caps (''aṣṭhīvantau''), the two legs (''jaṅghe''), the two knee-joints (''jānunoḥ sandhī''). Then comes above the two kness (''jānū'') the foursided (''catuṣṭaya''), pliant (''śithira'') trunk (''kabandha''). The two hips (''śroṇī'') and the two thighs (''ārū'') are the props of the frame  (''kusindha''). Next come the breast-bone (''uras''), the cervical cartilages (''grīvāḥ''), the two breast pieces (''stanau''), the two shoulder-blades (''kaphoḍau''), the neck-bones (''skandhau''), and the backbones (''pṛṣṭīḥ''), the collar-bones (''aṃsau''), the arms (''bāhū''), the seven apertures in the head (''sapta khāni śīrṣaṇi''), the ears (''karṇau''), the nostrils (''nāsike''), the eyes (''cakṣaṇī''), the mouth (''mukha''), the jaws (''hanū''), the tongue (''jihvā''), the brain (''mastiṣka''), the forehead (''lalāṭa''), the facial bone (''kakāṭikā''), the cranium (''kapāla''), and the structure of the jaws (''cityā hanvoḥ'').<br><br>This system presents marked similarities with the later system of [[चरक|Caraka]] and Suśruta,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1312> ''Osteology,'' 112.</ref> which render certain the names ascribed to the several terms by Hoernle. ''Kaphoḍau,'' which is variously read in the manuscripts,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1312> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 568.</ref> is rendered ‘collar-bone’ by Whitney, but ‘elbow’ in the St. Petersburg Dictionary. ''Skandha'' in the plural regularly<ref name=fx6_ve2_1312> Av. x. 7. 3 (where the Skandhas are compared with the [[कृत्तिकास्|Kṛttikās]], probably because both were seven in number, but this is not certain);<br> 9, 20;<br> vi. 135, 1;<br> xii. 5, 67;<br> Hoernle, ''Journal,'' 1906, 918;<br> 1907, 1, 2.</ref> denotes ‘neck-bones,’ or, more precisely, ‘cervical vertebræ,’ a part denoted also by ''uṣṇihā'' in the plural.<ref name=fx7_ve2_1312> Av. vi. 134, 1;<br> Rv. vi. 163, 2= Av. ii. 33, 2;<br> Av. ix. 8, 21;<br> x. 10, 20.</ref> ''Pṛṣṭī''<ref name=fx8_ve2_1312> Rv. x. 87. 10 = Av. viii. 3, 10;<br> Av. ix. 7, 5, 6;<br> x. 9, 20;<br> xii. 1, 34;<br> xviii. 4, 10;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 6, 2, 7. See Hoernle, ''Journal,'' 1907. 2 ''et seq.;<br>'' Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 548;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44. 164. n. 2.</ref> denotes not ‘rib,’ which is ''[[पर्शु|parśu]],''<ref name=fx9_ve2_1312> Av. ix. 7, 6, etc.</ref> but a transverse process of a vertebra, and so the vertebra itself, there being in the truncal portion of the spinal column seventeen vertebræ and thirty-four transverse processes. The vertebræ are also denoted by ''kīkasā'' in the plural,<ref name=fx10_ve2_1312> Av. ix. 7, 5;<br> 8, 14.</ref> which sometimes<ref name=fx11_ve2_1312> Av. xi. 8, 15.</ref> is limited to the upper portion of the vertebral column, sometimes<ref name=fx12_ve2_1312> Av. ii. 33, 2;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 6, 2, 10.</ref> to the thoracic portion of the spine. ''Anūka'' also denotes the vertebral column,<ref name=fx13_ve2_1312> Av. iv. 14, 8. ''Cf.'' ix. 8, 21 (the spine of the trunk).</ref> or more specially the lumbar<ref name=fx14_ve2_1312> Av. ii. 33, 2.</ref> or thoracic<ref name=fx15_ve2_1312> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 2, 4. 12. 14. ''Cf.'' the phrase ''īṣc anūkye,'' Av. xi. 3, 9, where the two shafts of a cart are compared with the transverse processes of a vertebra.</ref> portion of the spine; it is said in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx15_ve2_1312/>  that there are twenty transverse processes in the lumbar spine (''udara'') and thirty-two in the thoracic, which gives twenty-six vertebræ, the true number (but the modern division is seven cervical, twelve thoracic, five lumbar, and two false--the sacrum and the coccyx). The vertebral column is also denoted by ''karūkara,''<ref name=fx16_ve2_1312> Av. xi. 9, 8;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 124.</ref> which, however, is usually found in the plural<ref name=fx17_ve2_1312> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 2, 4, 10, 14.</ref> denoting the transverse processes of the vertebræ, a sense expressed also by ''kuntāpa.''<ref name=fx18_ve2_1312> ''Ibid.,'' xii. 2, 4, 12.</ref><br><br>''Grīvā,'' in the plural, denotes cervical vertebræ, the number seven being given by the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx19_ve2_1312> ''Ibid.'' xii. 2, 4, 10.</ref> but usually<ref name=fx20_ve2_1312> Rv. vi. 163, 2 = Av. ii. 33, 2;<br> Av. vi. 134, 1;<br> ix. 7, 3;<br> x. 9, 20;<br> xi. 8, 15;<br> Hoernle, ''Journal,'' 1906, 916 ''et seq.''</ref> the word simply means windpipe, or, more accurately, the cartilaginous rings under the skin. '''Jatru,''' also in the plural, denotes the cervical cartilages,<ref name=fx21_ve2_1312> Rv. vii. 1, 12 = Av. xiv. 2, 12.</ref> or possibly the costal cartilages, which are certainly so called in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx22_ve2_1312> xii. 2, 4, 11. ''Cf.'' vii. 6, 2, 10;<br> Hoernle, ''Journal,'' 1906, 922 ''et seq.''</ref> where their number is given as eight.<br><br>''Bhaṃsas,'' which occurs thrice in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx23_ve2_1312> Av. ii. 33, 5;<br> ix. 8, 21, with a fuller version in the Paippalāda recension (Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 77, 551). In viii. 6, 5, it denotes vulva: Hoernle, 16-18.</ref> seems to denote the pubic bone or arch rather than the ‘buttocks’ or ‘fundament,’ as Whitney<ref name=fx24_ve2_1312> ''Loc. cit.''</ref> takes it.<br><br>In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx25_ve2_1312> x. 5, 4, 12;<br> xii. 3, 2, 3, 4;<br> '''Hoernle,''' ''Osteology,'' 238, 239, and the criticism in 106-109, which shows how far removed the Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] is from a scientific system. ''Cf.'' Keith, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 62, 135 ''et seq.''</ref> the number of bones in the the human body is given as 360. The number of the bones of the head and trunk are given in another passage<ref name=fx26_ve2_1312> xii. 2, 4, 9-14;<br> Hoernle, ''Osteology,'' 240.</ref> as follows: The head is threefold, consisting of skin (''tvac''), bone (''asthi''), brain (''matiṣka''); the neck has 15 bones: 14 transverse processes (''karūkara'') and the strength (''vīrya'')--''i.e.,'' the bone of the centre regarded as one--as the 15th; the breast has 17: 16 cervical cartilages (''jatru''), and the sternum (''uras'') as the 17th; the abdominal portion of the spine has 21: 20 trans-  verse processes (''kuntāpa''), and the abdominal portion (''udara'') as the 21st; the two sides have 27: 26 ribs (''[[पर्शु|parśu]]''), and the two sides as the 27th; the thoracic portion of the spine (''anūka'') has 33: 32 transverse processes, and the thoracic portion as 33rd.<br><br>There are several enumerations of the parts of the body, not merely of the skeleton, in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx27_ve2_1312> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 81-93;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 9;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxviii. 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 4.</ref> They include the hair (''lomāni''), skin (''tvac''), flesh (''[[मांस|māṃsa]]''), bone (''asthi''), marrow (''majjan''), liver (''yakṛt''), lungs (''kloman''), kidneys (''matasne''), gall (''pitta''), entrails (''āntrāṇi''), bowels (''gudāḥ''), spleen (''plīhan''), navel (''[[नाभि|nābhi]]''), belly (''udara''), rectum (''vaniṣṭhu''), womb (''yoni''), penis (''plāśi'' and ''śepa''), face (''mukha''), head (''śiras''), tongue (''jihvā''), mouth (''āsan''), rump (''[[पायु|pāyu]]''), leech (''[[वाल|vāla]]''), eye (''[[चक्षुस्|cakṣus]]''), eyelashes (''pakṣmāṇi''), eyebrows (''utāni''), nose (''nas''), breath (''[[व्य्आन|vyāna]]''), nose-hairs (''nasyāni''), ears (''karṇau''), brows (''bhrū''), body or trunk (''ātman''), waist (''upastha''), hair on the face (''śmaśrūṇi''), and on the head (''keśāḥ''). Another enumeration<ref name=fx28_ve2_1312> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xx. 5-13;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 8;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxviii. 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 5.</ref> gives ''śiras, mukha, keśāḥ, śmaśrūṇi, [[प्राण|prāṇa]]'' (breath), ''[[चक्षुस्|cakṣus]], śrotra'' (ear), ''jihvā, [[वाच्|vāc]]'' (speech), ''manas'' (mind), ''aṅgulīḥ, aṅgāni'' (limbs), ''bāhū, hastau'' (hands), ''karṇau, ātmā, uras'' (sternum), ''pṛṣṭīḥ'' (vertebræ), ''udara, aṃsau, grīvāḥ, śroṇī, ūrū, aratnī'' (elbows), ''jānūni, [[नाभि|nābhi]], [[पायु|pāyu]], bhasat'' (fundament), ''āṇḍau'' (testicles), ''pasas'' (membrum virile), ''jaṅghā, pad'' (foot), ''lomāni, tvac, [[मांस|māṃsa]], asthi, majjan.'' Another set of names<ref name=fx29_ve2_1312> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxix. 8. 9. 10.</ref> includes ''vaniṣṭhu, purītat'' (pericardium), ''lomāni, tvac, [[लोहित|lohita]]'' (blood), ''medas'' (fat), ''māṃsāni, snāvāni'' (sinews), ''asthīni, majjānaḥ, retas'' (semen), ''[[पायु|pāyu]], kośya'' (flesh near the heart), ''pārśvya'' (intercostal flesh), etc.<br><br>The bones of the skeleton of the horse are enumerated in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx30_ve2_1312> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxv. 1-9;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 15. ''Cf.'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 1.</ref><br><br>In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx31_ve2_1312> i. 2, 2.</ref> the human body is regarded as made up of one hundred and one items; there are four parts,  each of twenty-five members, with the trunk as one hundred and first. In the two upper parts there are five four-jointed<ref name=fx32_ve2_1312> This is contrary to fact: Hoernle, ''Osteology,'' 122, 123.</ref> fingers, two ''kakṣasī'' (of uncertain meaning),<ref name=fx33_ve2_1312> Perhaps the armpit regarded as in some way double;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 175.</ref> the arm (''dos''), the collar-bone (''[[अक्ष|akṣa]]''), and the shoulder-blade (''aṃsa-[[फलक|phalaka]]''). In the two lower portions there are five four-jointed toes, the thigh, the leg, and three articulations, according to Sāyaṇa's commentary.<br><br>The [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx34_ve2_1312> ii. 2.</ref> enumerates three bones in the head,<ref name=fx35_ve2_1312> ''Cf.'' Hoernle, ''Osteology,'' 172 ''et seq.;<br>'' Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 2, 4, 9.</ref> three joints (''parvāṇi'') in the neck,<ref name=fx36_ve2_1312> ii. 3, See Keith, ''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,'' 9, n. 4.</ref> the collar-bone (''[[अक्ष|akṣa]]''),<ref name=fx37_ve2_1312> ii. 4;<br> Hoernle, ''Osteology,'' 202 ''et seq.;<br>'' Keith, ''op. cit.,'' 9, n. 5.</ref> three joints in the fingers,<ref name=fx38_ve2_1312> ii. 5. ''Cf.'' n. 32. The later [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] here improves on the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] osteology.</ref> and twenty-one transverse processes in the spine (''anūka'').<ref name=fx39_ve2_1312> ii. 6. See Keith, ''op. cit.,'' 10, n. 4.</ref> The Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx40_ve2_1312> iii. 2, 9.</ref> enumerates four constituents in the head (''[[प्राण|prāṇa]], [[चक्षुस्|cakṣus]], śrotra, [[वाच्|vāc]]''), but there are many variations, the number going up to twelve on one calculation.<ref name=fx41_ve2_1312> See references in Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 185, 192, 195. The numbers vary and are fanciful, being of no scientific importance.</ref> In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx42_ve2_1312> i. 7, 1.</ref> an enumeration is given consisting of ''carma'' (skin), ''[[मांस|māṃsa]], snāvan, asthi,'' and ''majjan;'' and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx43_ve2_1312> vi. 29, 4.</ref> has ''lomāni, [[मांस|māṃsa]], tvac, asthi, majjan,'' and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx44_ve2_1312> iii. 2, 1. 2;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, viii. 1. 2.</ref> couples ''majjānaḥ, snāvāni,'' and ''asthīni.'' Other terms relating to the body are ''kaṅkūṣa,''<ref name=fx45_ve2_1312> Av. ix. 8, 2, where the Paippalāda recension has ''kaṅkukha.''</ref> perhaps a part of the ear,<ref name=fx46_ve2_1312> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 378.</ref> ''yoni'' (female organ), ''[[कक्ष|kakṣa]]''<ref name=fx47_ve2_1312> Av. vi. 127, 2. ''Cf. kakṣī,'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 9.</ref> (armpit), '''Danta''' (tooth), ''[[नख|nakha]]'' (nail), ''prapada''<ref name=fx48_ve2_1312> Av. ii. 33, 5, with Lanman's note in Whitney's Translation, p. 77;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 204. In that Āraṇyaka the passage ii. 1, 4 makes the sense ‘toe’ improbable.</ref> (forepart of the foot), ''halīkṣṇa''<ref name=fx49_ve2_1312> Av. ii. 33, 3;<br> Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 76.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hoernle, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1906, 916 ''et seq.;<br>'' 1907, 1, ''et seq.;<br> Osteology, passim.''</ref> (gall). 

शरु
<u>'''Śaru'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1313> i. 100, 18;<br> 172, 2;<br> 186, 9;<br> ii. 12, 10;<br> iv. 3, 7;<br> 28, 3, etc.</ref> and Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1313> i. 2, 3;<br> 19, 2;<br> vi. 65, 2;<br> xii. 2, 47.</ref> a missile weapon, often certainly an ‘arrow,’<ref name=fx3_ve2_1313> ''E.g.,'' Rv. x. 125, 6;<br> and x. 87, 6.</ref> but perhaps sometimes a ‘dart’ or ‘spear.’<ref name=fx4_ve2_1313> Perhaps Rv. iv. 3, 7, where ''bṛhatī'' is applied to it, and where ‘lance’ seems the best sense, the use being metaphorical.<br><br>''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 223;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 301.</ref>

शर्करा
<u>'''Śarkarā,'''</u> fem. plur., denotes in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_1314> Av. xi. 7, 21;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 1, 6, 2;<br> 2, 6, 2;<br> 6, 4, 4, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_1314> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 3, 7;<br> 2, 1, 4;<br> iii. 12, 6, atapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 1, 8, etc.</ref> ‘grit’ or ‘gravel.’

शर्कराख्य
<u>'''Śarkarākhya.'''</u> See '''[[शार्कराक्ष|Śārkarākṣa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शर्कोट
<u>'''Śarkoṭa'''</u> is the name of an animal in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1316> vii. 56, 5.</ref> either a ‘serpent,’ as Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_1316> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' comparing the later Karkoṭaka.</ref> and Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve2_1316> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 95.</ref> held, or a ‘scorpion,’ as Grill,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1316> ''Hundert Lieder,^2'' 183.</ref> Henry,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1316> ''Le livre vii de l' Atharvavéda,'' 82.</ref> and Bloomfield<ref name=fx6_ve2_1316> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 554, 555.</ref> think.

शर्ध
<u>'''Śardha.'''</u> See '''[[व्रात|Vrāta]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शर्ध्य
<u>'''Śardhya'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1318> i. 119, 5.</ref> is taken by Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_1318> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> as perhaps denoting a part of the chariot. The sense is, however, quite uncertain.

शर्य
<u>'''Śarya,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1319> i. 119, 10, where the sense is not certain.</ref> '''Śaryā,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1319> i. 148, 4;<br> x. 178, 3. ''Cf.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] v. 4;<br> x. 29.</ref> seem in the Rigveda to denote an ‘arrow.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_1319> As derived from 1. '''[[शर|Śara]],''' and meaning literally ‘made from a reed.’</ref> Perhaps, also, Śaryā<ref name=fx4_ve2_1319> Rv. ix. 110, 5;<br> x. 61, 3.</ref> and [[शर्य|Śarya]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_1319> Rv. ix. 14, 4;<br> 68, 2.</ref> (neut.) mean the ‘wicker-  work’ in the Soma sieve, but the exact sense of the passages is doubtful.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1319> Hillebrandt;<br> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 52, takes ''śaryāṇi'' in Rv. ix. 68, 2, as denoting the outer husk of the Soma plant. See also Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 255, n. 1.</ref>

शर्यणावन्त्
<u>'''Śaryaṇāvant'''</u> occurs in several passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1320> i. 84, 14;<br> viii. 6, 39;<br> 7, 29;<br> 64, 11;<br> ix. 65, 22;<br> 113, 1;<br> x. 35, 2. See Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 64 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 17);<br> Śāṭyāyanaka in Sāyaṇa on Rv. i. 84, 13.</ref> in all of which Sāyaṇa sees a local name. According to his account, Śaryaṇāḥ (masc. plur.) is a district in '''[[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]],''' [[शर्यणावन्त्|Śaryaṇāvant]] being a lake not far from it in the back part (''jaghanārdhe'') of [[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]]. The unusual consistency of his statements on this point is in favour of the word being a place name; it is also to be noted that [[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]] contained the lake '''[[अन्यतःप्लक्षा|Anyataḥplakṣā]].''' Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1320> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> however, thought that in two passages<ref name=fx3_ve2_1320> i. 84, 14;<br> x. 35, 2.</ref> the word denoted merely a ‘lake,’ literally ‘(water) covered with a thicket of reeds’ (''śaryaṇa''), and in the others a Soma vessel. Zimmer<ref name=fx4_ve2_1320> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 19, 20.</ref> inclines to this rendering. On the other hand, Pischel<ref name=fx5_ve2_1320> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 217. So Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 398, 399.</ref> accepts Sāyaṇa's view. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx6_ve2_1320> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 126, ''et seq.''</ref> also sees in the word a place name, but he is inclined to locate it among the ‘five tribes,’<ref name=fx7_ve2_1320> This is deduced, not with any certainty, from Rv. ix. 65, 22.</ref> which is not quite inconsistent with its being in [[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]], for the connexion of the '''Pūrus''' with the later '''Kurus''' is known;<ref name=fx8_ve2_1320> Hillebrandt, ''op. cit.,'' 1, 142, n. 4, Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 205.</ref> or perhaps, he suggests, [[शर्यणावन्त्|Śaryaṇāvant]] is an old name for the Wular sea of Kaśmīr, which was only a reminiscence in Vedic times. This is not probable; still less so is Ludwig's hypothesis<ref name=fx9_ve2_1320> ''Op. cit.,'' 3, 201.</ref> that the [[शर्यणावन्त्|Śaryaṇāvant]] is the later eastern '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]].''' Bergaigne<ref name=fx10_ve2_1320> ''Religion Védique,'' 1, 206.</ref> regards the name as that of a celestial preparer of Soma.

शर्यात
<u>'''Śaryāta'''</u> is mentioned once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1321> i. 112, 17.</ref> as a protégé of the Aśvins. Of him in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]^2 and the  Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_1321> iii. 120-122 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 11, cxlv).</ref> is told a story how '''[[च्यवन|Cyavana]]''' was annoyed by the '''Śāryātas,''' and appeased by the gift of '''[[सुकन्या|Sukanyā]],''' Śaryāta's daughter, as a wife, and how [[च्यवन|Cyavana]] was then restored to youth by the Aśvins. He is there called '''[[मानव|Mānava]]''' (‘descendant of Manu’). He appears also as [[शर्यात|Śaryāta]] [[मानव|Mānava]], a sacrificer, in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_1321> iv. 7, 1;<br> 8, 3, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 250 ''et seq.;<br>'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, 272 ''et seq.;<br>'' Oertel, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 236, 237.</ref>

शर्व-दत्त
<u>'''Śarva-datta'''</u> (‘given by the god Śarva’) '''[[गार्ग्य|Gārgya]]''' (‘descendant of '''[[गर्ग|Garga]]'''’) is the name of a teacher in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1322> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref>

शल
<u>'''Śala'''</u> is explained by the St. Petersburg Dictionary as a measure of length in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1323> viii. 7, 28.</ref> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1323> xii. 10 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 464).</ref> and [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_1323> i. 5, 10, 1 (where this is the interpretation of the commentator).</ref> Whitney<ref name=fx4_ve2_1323> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 501.</ref> objects that the sense in all<ref name=fx5_ve2_1323> He does not notice the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]]. Against his criticism it must be noted that in every one of the passages a numeral is compounded with [[शल|Śala]], as ''tri-[[शल|śala]],'' etc.</ref> these passages is not suited by this meaning.

शलभ
<u>'''Śalabha,'''</u> ‘locust,’ appears in the Paippalāda recension of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1324> ix. 5, 9.</ref> for '''[[शरभ|Śarabha]],''' the reading of the received text, and is regarded by Whitney<ref name=fx2_ve2_1324> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 534. But the mention of the goat in the passage strongly supports Sarabha. See Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] i. 2, 3, 9.</ref> as making better sense.

शलली
<u>'''Śalalī'''</u> denotes the ‘quill’ of the porcupine, used for parting the hair and anointing the eyes.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1325> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiii. 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 6, 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 4, 5.</ref> 

शलुन
<u>'''Śaluna'''</u> is found in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1326> ii. 31, 2. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 73;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 315;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98 (Śalunna).</ref> denoting a ‘worm.’ The Paippalāda recension reads Śalūla, and Sāyaṇa Śalga.

शल्क
<u>'''Śalka'''</u> denotes in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_1327> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 9, 3;<br> 4, 2, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xx. 8;<br> xxvii. 7, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_1327> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 14, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 9, 9;<br> 2, 1, 15.</ref> chip' or ‘shaving’ used for kindling a fire, etc.

शल्मल्ल्
<u>'''Śalmall'''</u> is the name of the ‘silk cotton tree’ (''Salmalia Malabarica''). Its fruit is regarded as poisonous in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1328> vii. 50, 3.</ref> but the car of the bridal procession is made of its wood.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1328> x. 85, 20.</ref> It is described as the tallest of trees.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1328> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 12, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 13;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 2, 7, 4;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 4, 11, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 317, n. 2.</ref>

शल्य
<u>'''Śalya.'''</u> See '''[[इषु|Iṣu]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शल्यक
<u>'''Śalyaka'''</u> denotes in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_1330> xxiv. 35.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1330> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 26, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 82.</ref> the ‘porcupine.’

शवर्त
<u>'''Śavarta'''</u> is the name of a species of ‘worm’ in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1331> ix. 4, 16, with the various reading Svavarta, Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 531.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1331> v. 7, 23, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98. Possibly Roth is right in holding that the word = ''śava-[[वर्त|varta]],'' a worm ‘living on carrion.’</ref>

शवस्
<u>'''Śavas'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[अग्निभू काश्यप|Agnibhū Kāśyapa]]''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1332> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373.</ref> 

शवस
<u>'''Śavasa'''</u> occurs only in the false reading ''[[शवस|Śavasa]]-Uśinareṣu'' in the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i, 2, 9) for ''sa-Vaśośīnareṣu.'' See '''[[वश|Vaśa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शविष्ठ
<u>'''Śaviṣṭha'''</u> is, according to Ludwig,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1334> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 163.</ref> the name of a generous patron in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1334> viii. 74, 14, 15.</ref>

शश
<u>'''Śaśa,'''</u> ‘hare,’ is found once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1335> x. 28, 2. Later, a goat supplants the hare in this curious story;<br> see Bo7thling, Proceedings of the Saxon Academy, 1894, ''et seq.''</ref> where it is said to have swallowed a razor. The animal is occasionally mentioned later also.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1335> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 56;<br> xxiv. 38;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Samhitā, iii. 14, 15;<br> the hare in the moon, Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 1, 5, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 84.</ref>

शशयु
<u>'''Śaśayu,'''</u> ‘pursuing the hare,’ is the epithet of some animal ('''[[मृग|Mṛga]]''') in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1336> iv. 3, 6.</ref> Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve2_1336> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 79, 84.</ref> thinks the tiger is meant, but this is not likely. Roth<ref name=fx3_ve2_1336> In Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 149.</ref> considers that a bird of prey is intended, while Whitney,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1336> ''Loc. cit.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 368.</ref> following the commentator, renders the word by ‘lurking.’

शश्वती
<u>'''Śaśvatī.'''</u> See '''Āsaṅga.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शष्प
<u>'''Śaṣpa'''</u> in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_1338> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 13, 81;<br> xxi. 29;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 5, 3;<br> 8, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 7, 2, 8;<br> 9, 1, 2, etc.</ref> denotes ‘young or sprouting grass.’

शस्तृ
<u>'''Śastṛ'''</u> in the Rigveda (i. 162, 5) and the Atharvaveda (ix. 3, 3) denotes the slaughterer of an animal. <br>==Foot Notes==

शस्त्र
<u>'''Śastra'''</u> is the technical term<ref name=fx1_ve2_1340> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 7, 2, etc.;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxix. 2, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 25. 28, etc.;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 2, 4, 20, etc. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 353, and Caland and Henry, ''L'Agniṣṭoma, passim,'' where the Śastras are set out at length.</ref> for the ‘recitation’ of the [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] priest, as opposed to the '''[[स्तोत्र|Stotra]]''' of the Udgātṛ. The recitations at the morning offering of Soma are called the [[आज्य|Ājya]] and Praüga; at the midday offering, the Marutvatīya and the Niṣkevalya; at the evening offering, the Vaiśvadeva and the Āgnimāruta.

शाकटायन
<u>'''Śākaṭāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[शकट|Śakaṭa]],’ is the patronymic of a grammarian referred to by '''[[यास्क|Yāska]]'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1341> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], i. 3, 12 ''et. seq.''</ref> and in the Prātiśākhyas,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1341> Rigveda Prātiśakhya, i. 3;<br> xiii. 16;<br> Vājasaneyi Prātiśakhya, iii. 8, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 143, 151, 152, 217.</ref> as well as often later.

शाक-दास भाडितायन
<u>'''Śāka-[[दास|dāsa]] Bhāḍitāyana'''</u> (‘descendant of Bhaḍita’) is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1342> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373</ref> as the pupil of '''[[विचक्षण ताण्ड्य|Vicakṣaṇa Tāṇḍya]].'''

शाक-पूणि
<u>'''Śāka-pūṇi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Śakapūṇa,’ is the name of a grammarian often mentioned in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1343> iii. 11;<br> viii. 5, 6, 14;<br> xii. 19;<br> xiii. 10, 11. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 85.</ref>

शाकल
<u>'''Śākala'''</u> in the Aitaṛeya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1344> iii. 43, 5 (Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 277). ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 33, n.</ref> denotes the ‘teaching of '''[[शाकल्य|Śākalya]]'''’ according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary. But Bo7htlingk<ref name=fx2_ve2_1344> Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> seems right in taking it as a kind of snake in that passage.

शाकल्य
<u>'''Śākalya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Śakala,’ is the patronymic of '''Vidagdha''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1345> xi. 6, 3, 3;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 9, 1;<br> iv. 1, 7, etc.</ref> and of '''[[स्थविर|Sthavira]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1345> iii. 2, 1. 6.</ref> and [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyakas.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1345> vii. 16;<br> viii. 1. 11.</ref> An undefined [[शाकल्य|Śākalya]]  is mentioned in the same Āraṇyakas,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1345> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]], iii. 1, 1;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]], vii. 1.</ref> in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],<ref name=fx5_ve2_1345> vi. 28.</ref> and often later, as a teacher dealing with the text of the Rigveda. Weber<ref name=fx6_ve2_1345> ''Indian Literature,'' 32, 33.</ref> is inclined to identify Vidagdha with the [[शाकल्य|Śākalya]] who is known as the maker of the Pada Pāṭha of the Rigveda, but Oldenberg<ref name=fx7_ve2_1345> ''Prolegomena,'' 380, n.</ref> thinks that the latter was later than the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] period. Geldner<ref name=fx8_ve2_1345> ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 144-146.</ref> identifies the two; this view, however, is not very probable.<ref name=fx9_ve2_1345> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 239, 240.</ref>

शाकायनिन्
<u>'''Śākāyanin,'''</u> in the plural, denotes the followers of '''[[शाकायन्य|Śākāyanya]]''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (x. 4, 5, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

शाकायन्य
<u>'''Śākāyanya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Śāka,’ is the patronymic of '''Jāta''' in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1347> xxii. 7 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 472). ''Cf.'' Maitrāyaṇī [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 2;<br> vi. 29.</ref>

शाकिन्
<u>'''Śākin,'''</u> plur., is believed by Ludwig<ref name=fx1_ve2_1348> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 155;<br> Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 521, n.</ref> to designate a group of generous donors in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1348> v. 52, 17.</ref>

शाक्त्य
<u>'''Śāktya,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[शक्ति|Śakti]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''Gaurivīti.'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1349> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 19, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 8, 3, 7;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 14;<br> xii. 13, 10;<br> xxv. 7, 2;<br> Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxiii. 11, 14;<br> xxiv. 10, 6. 8.</ref>

शाक्वर
<u>'''Śākvara.'''</u> See '''[[शक्वरी|Śakvarī]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शाखा
<u>'''Śākhā'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1351> i. 8, 8;<br> vii. 43, 1;<br> x. 94, 3.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1351> Av. iii. 6, 8;<br> x. 7, 21;<br> xi. 2, 19, etc.</ref> denotes the ‘branch’ of a tree. '''[[वया|Vayā]]''' is more often used in this sense in the Rigveda. 

शाङ्खायन
<u>'''Śāṅkhāyana'''</u> as the name of a teacher is not mentioned in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], but it occurs in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) at the end of the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1352> xv. 1. Oldenberg's suggestion (''Sacred Books of the East,'' xxix. 4, 5) that Guṇākhya is intended as the author of the Sūtras is quite unnecessary;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 328.</ref> where Guṇākhya is given as the authority for that work. In the Śrauta Sūtras<ref name=fx2_ve2_1352> Hillebrandt, [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 1, viii ''et seq.''</ref> the name of [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] never occurs, but the [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] Sūtras<ref name=fx3_ve2_1352> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 10;<br> vi. 10;<br> Śāmbavya Gṛhyā [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] in ''Indische Studien,'' 15, 154;<br> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 4. ''Cf.'' Kārikā in Nārāyaṇa on [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 1, 10;<br> Ānartīya on [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 2, 18.</ref> seem to recognize as teacher '''Suyajña [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]].''' In later times<ref name=fx4_ve2_1352> Bühler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 2, xxxi.</ref> the school flourished in Northern Gujarat. [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] appears in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Prātiśākhya<ref name=fx5_ve2_1352> xv. 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 32, 44, 50 ''et seq.;<br>'' 80, 313, 314;<br> Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 45, 191, 205, 245, 249.</ref> along with Kāṇḍamāyana.

शाट्यायन
<u>'''Śāṭyāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Śāṭya,’ is the patronymic of a teacher mentioned twice in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1353> viii. 1, 4, 9;<br> x. 4, 5, 2.</ref> and often in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_1353> i. 6, 2;<br> 30, 1;<br> ii. 2, 8;<br> 4, 3;<br> 9, 10;<br> iii. 13, 6;<br> 28, 5.</ref> In a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the latter work<ref name=fx3_ve2_1353> iv. 16, 1.</ref> he is called a pupil of '''[[ज्वालायन|Jvālāyana]],''' while in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] at the end of the Sāmavidhāna [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] he appears as a pupil of '''[[बादरायण|Bādarāyaṇa]].''' The Śāṭyāyanins, his followers, are frequently mentioned in the Sūtras,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1353> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 5, 18;<br> Anupada [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 8;<br> ii. 9;<br> iii. 2, 11;<br> iv. 8, etc.;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 44.</ref> the Śāṭyāyani [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_1353> Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], v. 23, 3.</ref> and the Śāṭyāyanaka<ref name=fx6_ve2_1353> ''Ibid.,'' x. 12, 13. 14;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 2, 24;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 4, 13.</ref> being also referred to in them. It has been shown by Oertel<ref name=fx7_ve2_1353> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, ccxli;<br> 18, 20 ''et seq.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 203;<br> Aufrecht, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 151, 152.</ref> that this [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] bore a close resemblance to, and probably belonged to the same period as, the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. 

शाण्ड
<u>'''Śāṇḍa,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[शण्ड|Śaṇḍa]],'''’ is the name of a man in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1354> vi. 63, 9. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 158.</ref> who is praised for his generosity. It is not likely that he is identical with '''[[पुरुपन्था|Purupanthā]]''' mentioned in the next verse.

शाण्डिल
<u>'''Śāṇḍila,'''</u> masc. plur., is the term applied to the ‘descendants of '''[[शाण्डिल्य|Śāṇḍilya]]'''’ in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka (i. 22, 10).<br>==Foot Notes==

शाण्डिली-पुत्र
<u>'''Śāṇḍilī-putra,'''</u> ‘pupil of a female descendant of Śaṇḍila,’ is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[राथीतरीपुत्र|Rāthītarīputra]],''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1356> vi. 4, 32 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 5, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref>

शाण्डिल्य
<u>'''Śāṇḍilya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Śaṇḍila,’ is the patronymic of several teachers (see '''Udara''' and '''Suyajña'''). The most important [[शाण्डिल्य|Śāṇḍilya]] is the one cited several times as an authority in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1357> ix. 4, 4, 17;<br> 5, 2, 15;<br> x. 1, 4, 10;<br> 4, 1, 11;<br> 6, 3, 5;<br> 5, 9. ''Cf.'' Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 11, 4.</ref> where his Agni, or ‘sacrificial fire,’ is called [[शाण्डिल|Śāṇḍila]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_1357> ix. 1, 1, 43;<br> 3, 3, 18;<br> 5, 1, 61, 68, etc.</ref> From this it appears clearly that he was one of the great teachers of the fire ritual which occupies the fifth and following books of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. In the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) at the end of the tenth book<ref name=fx3_ve2_1357> x. 6, 5, 9.</ref> he is given as a pupil of '''Kuśri''' and a teacher of '''[[वात्स्य|Vātsya]];''' another list at the end of the last book in the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension<ref name=fx4_ve2_1357> vi. 5, 4.</ref> gives him as a pupil of [[वात्स्य|Vātsya]], and the latter as a pupil of Kuśri. In the confused and worthless<ref name=fx5_ve2_1357> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xxxiv. n. 2.</ref> lists of teachers at the end of the second and fourth books of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] he is said to be the pupil of various persons--'''[[कैशोर्य|Kaiśorya]] [[काप्य|Kāpya]],'''<ref name=fx6_ve2_1357> ii. 5, 22;<br> iv. 5, 28 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> '''Vaiṣṭapureya,'''<ref name=fx7_ve2_1357> ii. 5, 20;<br> iv. 5, 26 Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> '''[[कौशिक|Kauśika]],'''<ref name=fx8_ve2_1357> ii. 6, 1;<br> iv. 6, 1 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref> '''[[गौतम|Gautama]],'''<ref name=fx9_ve2_1357> ii. 5, 20;<br> iv. 5, 26 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 1;<br> iv. 6, 1 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> '''[[बैजवाप|Baijavāpa]],'''<ref name=fx10_ve2_1357> ii. 5, 20;<br> iv. 5, 26 Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> and '''Āṇa-  bhimlāta.'''<ref name=fx11_ve2_1357> ii. 6, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].<br><br>''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xxxi ''et seq.;<br>'' 43, xviii ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 71, 76 ''et seq.;<br>'' 120, 131, 132;<br> Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 213.</ref> No doubt different Śāṇḍilyas may be meant, but the lists are too confused to claim serious consideration.

शाण्डिल्यायन
<u>'''Śāṇḍilyāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[शाण्डिल्य|Śāṇḍilya]],'''’ is the patronymic of a teacher in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1358> ix. 5, 1, 64.</ref> Apparently he is identical with '''Celaka,''' also mentioned in that text;<ref name=fx2_ve2_1358> x. 4, 5, 3. The name [[शाण्डिल्यायन|Śāṇḍilyāyana]], like that of Sāṇḍilya, is common in the Sūtras. See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 45, ''et seq.''</ref> it is thus reasonable to suppose that '''[[चैलकि|Cailaki]] Jīvala'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1358> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 3, 1, 34.</ref> was his son. It is much more doubtful whether he was<ref name=fx4_ve2_1358> Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 1, 259.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 53, 76, 120.</ref> the grandfather of '''Pravāhaṇa [[जैवल|Jaivala]],''' who was a prince rather than a Brahmin.

शात-पर्णेय
<u>'''Śāta-parṇeya'''</u> ‘descendant of Śataparṇa,’ is the patronymic of '''Dhīra''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (x. 3, 3, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

शाद
<u>'''Śāda'''</u> denotes ‘grass’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1360> ix. 15, 6.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1360> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxv. 1, etc.</ref> and later.

शाप
<u>'''Śāpa'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1361> vii. 18, 5;<br> x. 28, 4.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1361> Av. iii. 24, 3;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 11.</ref> denotes the ‘drift’ brought down by streams, possibly conceived as the ‘curse’ of the waters.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1361> ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 178;<br> ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 184, 185.</ref>

शामुल्य
<u>'''Śāmulya'''</u> in the marriage hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1362> x. 85, 29. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 262.</ref> denotes a collen garment’ worn at night. 

शमूल
<u>'''Śamūla'''</u> in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1363> i. 38, 4. ''Cf.'' Oertel, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 116, 233;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 4, 7;<br> [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], lxix. 3.</ref> seems to have much the same sense as '''[[शामुल्य|Śāmulya]],''' ‘a '''woollen''' shirt,’ generally. Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_1363> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, ccxliii.</ref> emends to ''śamīla,'' ‘pieces of [[शमी|Śamī]] wood.’

शाम्ब
<u>'''Śāmba.'''</u> See '''[[शार्कराक्ष|Śārkarākṣa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शाम्बर
<u>'''Śāmbara,'''</u> properly an adjective in the sense of ‘relating to '''[[शम्बर|Śambara]],'''’ appears in one passage of the Rigveda (iii. 47, 4) to be used as a substantive denoting ‘the contest with [[शम्बर|Śambara]].’<br>==Foot Notes==

शाम्बु
<u>'''Śāmbu'''</u> occurs in the plural with the '''Aṅgirases''' in a passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1366> xix. 39, 5, where Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 960, retracts the emendation ''Bhṛgubhyaḥ'' for ''Śāmbubhyaḥ'' in the text.</ref> no doubt as the name of a family of ancient teachers. There is extant in manuscript a [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] of the Śāmbavyas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1366> Oldenberg, ''Indische Studien,'' 15, 4, 154.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 678.</ref>

शायस्थि
<u>'''Śāyasthi'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1367> ''Indische Studien.'' 4, 372.</ref>

शारद
<u>'''Śārada.'''</u> See '''Pur.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शारि
<u>'''1. Śāri'''</u> occurs in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1369> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 12, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 14;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 33.</ref> It seems clear, since it is described as ‘of human speech’ (''[[पुरुष|puruṣa]]-[[वाच्|vāc]]''), that it was some kind of bird, possibly the later Sārikā (‘starling’), as Zimmer<ref name=fx2_ve2_1369> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 90, 91.</ref> suggests. See also '''[[शारिशाका|Śāriśākā]].''' 

शारि
<u>'''2. Śāri,'''</u> occurring in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1370> i. 112, 16.</ref> is said by Sāyaṇa to mean ‘arrow.’ This is uncertain, but connexion with '''[[शर|Śara]]''' or 1. '''[[शारि|Śāri]]''' is quite possible.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1370> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 103.</ref>

शारिशाका
<u>'''Śāriśākā'''</u> is an utterly obscure expression found in one passage of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1371> iii. 14, 5.</ref> Weber<ref name=fx2_ve2_1371> ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 246.</ref> thinks it means ‘dung (''[[शकन्|śakan]]'') of the [[शारि|Śāri]] bird’; Grill<ref name=fx3_ve2_1371> ''Hundert Lieder,^2'' 112.</ref> sees in the word the ''śārikā,'' ‘the hooded crow’; Roth<ref name=fx4_ve2_1371> In Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 110.</ref> suggests the emendation (''śāriḥ (= śāliḥ) śaka iva,'' ‘like rice in manure’; and Bloomfield<ref name=fx5_ve2_1371> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 351. But see Lanman's note in Whitney, ''loc. cit.''</ref> emends ''[[शारि|śāri]]-śukeva,'' ‘like starlings and parrots.’

शार्कराक्ष
<u>'''Śārkarākṣa'''</u> is found in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1372> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref> as the patronymic of a teacher, '''[[शाम्ब|Śāmba]],''' perhaps by a blunder for '''[[शार्कराक्ष्य|Śārkarākṣya]],''' ‘descendant of Śarkarākṣa.’ In the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve2_1372> xxii. 8.</ref> a teacher, [[शर्कराख्य|Śarkarākhya]], occurs, again probably a blunder, in this case for Śarkarākṣa himself. The patronymic Śārkarākṣi is found in the Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_1372> xii. 10. 10.</ref>

शार्कराक्ष्य
<u>'''Śārkarākṣya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Śarkarākṣa,’ is the patronymic of '''Jana''' in the Śatapatha Brāhmana<ref name=fx1_ve2_1373> x. 6, 1, 1.</ref> and the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_1373> v. 11, 1;<br> 15, 1.</ref> In the plural they occur in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx3_ve2_1373> ii. 1, 4.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1373> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 382.<br><br>''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 204;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 388;<br> 3, 259.</ref> It is not necessary to assume that the form is incorrect for [[शार्कराक्ष|Śārkarākṣa]].

शार्ग
<u>'''Śārga'''</u> is the name of a bird in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1374> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 19, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 14;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 33. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 93.</ref> Sāyana on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā calls it the ‘wild Caṭaka.’ 

शार्ङ्ग
<u>'''Śārṅga.'''</u>--The Anukramaṇī<ref name=fx1_ve2_1375> See also Sāyaṇa on Rv. x. 142;<br> Ṣaḍguruśiṣya on the Sarvānukramaṇī (ed. Macdonell), p. 163.</ref> (Index) of the Rigveda ascribes a hymn of that text<ref name=fx2_ve2_1375> x. 142.</ref> to the Śārṅgas, [[जरितृ|Jaritṛ]], [[द्रोण|Droṇa]], Sārisṛkva, and Stambamitra. The Mahābhārata<ref name=fx3_ve2_1375> i. 8334 ''et seq.''</ref> contains a tale describing how the four Śārṅgas, sons of the [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] Mandapāla, were saved from the great fire in the [[खाण्डव|Khāṇḍava]] forest by means of prayers. Sieg<ref name=fx4_ve2_1375> ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 44-50.</ref> has attempted to use this tale for the elucidation of the hymn in question, but without substantial success. As Oldenberg<ref name=fx5_ve2_1375> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 39, 79.</ref> says, the tale is based on the hymn rather than ''vice versa.''

शार्दूल
<u>'''Śārdūla,'''</u> ‘tiger,’ is mentioned in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_1376> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 11, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 10;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 11;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 30.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1376> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 5, 3;<br> iv. 1, 9, 11;<br> 5, 4, 10;<br> xi. 8, 4, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 8, 1;<br> 8, 5, 2;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 2, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 79.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[व्याघ्र|Vyāghra]].'''

शार्यात
<u>'''Śāryāta,'''</u> perhaps ‘descendant of '''[[शर्यात|Śaryāta]],'''’ is the name of a singer in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1377> i. 51, 12;<br> iii. 51, 7.</ref> A [[शार्यात|Śāryāta]] appears also in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1377> iv. 32, 7.</ref> with the patronymic '''[[मानव|Mānava]]''' as the seer of a Rigvedic hymn,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1377> x. 92.</ref> and as having been anointed by '''[[च्यवन|Cyavana]].'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_1377> viii. 21, 4.</ref> The same man is evidently meant by [[शर्यात|Śaryāta]] in the story of [[च्यवन|Cyavana]] in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_1377> iv. 1, 5, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> and the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx6_ve2_1377> iii. 121 ''et seq.'' (Whitney, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society'') 11, cxlv.;<br> Hopkins, ''ibid.,'' 26, 58.</ref> In both these passages the Śāryātas are mentioned as his descendants, and his daughter is called Śāryātī.

शालङ्कायन
<u>'''Śālaṅkāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Śalaṅku,’ is the patronymic of a teacher in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1378> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 383;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 10, 10;<br> Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxiv. 9, 1. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 75;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 49.</ref> 

शालङ्कायनी-पुत्र
<u>'''Śālaṅkāyanī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of Śalaṅku,’ is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[वार्षगणीपुत्र|Vārṣagaṇīputra]]''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 4, 31).<br>==Foot Notes==

शाला
<u>'''Śālā'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1380> v. 31, 5;<br> vi. 106, 3;<br> viii. 6, 10;<br> ix. 3, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' xiv. 1, 63.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1380> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 3, 1;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 1, 6, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘house’ in the wide sense of the word, including such meanings as ‘stall’ for cattle, ‘shed’ for corn, etc.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1380> Av. iii. 12, 1 ''et seq.,'' and ''cf.'' ix. 3, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> See '''[[गृह|Gṛha]].''' The householder is called [[शाला|Śālā]]-pati, ‘lord of the house,’ in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1380> ix. 3, 12.</ref>

शालावत्य
<u>'''Śālāvatya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Śalāvant,’ is the patronymic of '''Śilaka''' in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (i. 8, 1), and of '''[[गलूनस आर्क्षाकायण|Galūnasa Ārkṣākāyaṇa]]''' in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 38, 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

सालि
<u>'''Sāli,'''</u> a later word for ‘rice,’ is conjectured by Roth to be the equivalent of [[शारि|Śāri]] in the word '''[[शारिशाका|Śāriśākā]]''' in the Atharvaveda.<br>==Foot Notes==

शालूक
<u>'''Śālūka'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1383> iv. 34, 5. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 70;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 207.</ref> denotes the edible roots of the lotus.

शाल्व
<u>'''Śālva'''</u> as the name of a people is found in the Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1384> i. 2, 9. ''Cf.'' '''[[सल्व|Salva]].'''</ref> coupled with that of the '''Matsyas.'''

सावसायन
<u>'''Sāvasāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[शवस्|Śavas]],’ is the patronymic of '''Devataras''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1385> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373.</ref>

शास
<u>'''Śāsa'''</u> denotes in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_1386> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 17, 5;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 25, 1 (of the knife to be used in slaying '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]]''');<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 1, 4, 5;<br> xiii. 2, 3, 16.</ref> a ‘sword’ or ‘knife.’ 

शिंशपा
<u>'''Śiṃśapā'''</u> is the name of a tree (''Dalbergia Sisu'') in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1387> iii. 53, 19 (with the [[खदिर|Khadira]]).</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1387> Av. xx. 129, 7. ''Cf. śāṃśapa'' in vi. 129, 1;<br> Whiteny, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 378.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 61.</ref> It is a sately and beautiful tree.

शिंशु-मार
<u>'''Śiṃśu-māra,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1388> Rv. i. 116, 18;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 11;<br> Av. xi. 2, 25. In [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 28, the reading is doubtful.</ref> or '''Śiśu-māra,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1388> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 30, and the Paippalāda recension of the Av., ''loc. cit.;<br>'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 19.</ref> is the name of an aquatic creature in the Rigveda and the later Saṃhitās. It is either the ‘crocodile,’ the ‘alligator,’<ref name=fx3_ve2_1388> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 325, and Sāyaṇa on Rv., ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Av., ''loc. cit.;<br>'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> or the ‘porpoise’<ref name=fx4_ve2_1388> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. [[शिशुमार|śiśumāra]];<br>'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 157;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 624.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 96;<br> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 179.</ref> (''Delphinus Gangeticus'').

शिक्य
<u>'''Śikya'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1389> ix. 3, 6, where Whitney suggests that it may be an ornamental hanging appendage. See Lanman in Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 526. Whitney's alternative rendering ‘slings’ is better. See Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 597. ''Cf.'' perhaps Av. xiii. 4, 8.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1389> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 4, 2. 3;<br> 6, 9, 1, etc.</ref> seems to mean a carrying ‘sling’ of rope.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1389> This is pretty clearly the meaning in Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 4, 28;<br> vi. 7, 1, 16. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 268, n. 3.</ref>

शिख
<u>'''Śikha'''</u> and '''[[अनुशिख|Anuśikha]]''' are the names of two priests who served as '''[[नेष्टृ|Neṣṭṛ]]''' and '''[[पोतृ|Potṛ]]''' at the snake festival in the '''Pañca-''' viṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1390> xxv. 15, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 35.</ref>

शिखण्ड
<u>'''Śikhaṇḍa'''</u> denotes a ‘tuft’ or ‘lock,’ as a mode of wearing the hair, in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1391> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 3, 16, 2 (in the plural);<br> ''catuḥ-[[शिखण्ड|śikhaṇḍa]],'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 1, 27;<br> iii. 7, 6, 4 (corresponding to ''catuḥ-[[कपर्द|kaparda]],'' Rv. x. 114, 3). So ''śikhaṇḍin'' means ‘wearing a tuft of hair,’ and is found in Av. iv. 37, 7;<br> xi. 2, 12, etc.</ref> 

शिखण्डिन् याज्ञसेन
<u>'''Śikhaṇḍin Yājñasena'''</u> (‘descendant of Yajñasena’) is mentioned in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 4) as a priest of '''[[केशिन्|Keśin]] [[दाल्भ्य|Dālbhya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शिखर
<u>'''Śikhara'''</u> as a ‘peak’ of a mountain is found in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xxvi. 1), and often in the Epic.<br>==Foot Notes==

शिखा
<u>'''Śikhā'''</u> denotes in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1394> i. 3, 3, 5.</ref> the ‘knot of hair’ worn on the top of the head. Wearing the top-knot unloosened was the sign of mourning in the case of women and men alike.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1394> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 2, 9. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 11, 340;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 634, on Av. ix. 9, 7.</ref>

शिग्रु
<u>'''Śigru'''</u> is the name of a tribe occurring in the passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1395> vii. 18, 19.</ref> in which they are mentioned with the '''Ajas''' and the '''Yakṣus''' as having been defeated by the '''Tṛtsus''' and King '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]].''' It is impossible to say whether they were or were not under the leadership of '''[[भेद|Bheda]],''' as Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve2_1395> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 173.</ref> plausibly suggests. If Sigru is connected with the later ''[[शिग्रु|śigru]],'' ‘horse-radish’ (''Moringa pterygosperma''), which is quite probable, it is possible that the tribe was totemistic and non-Āryan, but this is a mere matter of conjecture.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1395> ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 85;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' 153;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, cliv;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1907, 929 ''et seq.;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 200, n.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 127.</ref> The '''Matsyas''' (‘Fishes’) were probably Āryan.

शिञ्जार
<u>'''Śiñjāra'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] twice mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1396> viii. 5, 25;<br> x. 40, 7. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 3, 139.</ref> along with '''[[कण्व|Kaṇva]], [[प्रियमेध|Priyamedha]], [[उपस्तुत|Upastuta]],''' and '''Atri.''' Geldner<ref name=fx2_ve2_1396> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 179.</ref> takes the word either as a name of Atri or an adjective. 

शिति-कक्षी
<u>'''Śiti-kakṣī'''</u> in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_1397> v. 5, 20, 1. ''Cf.'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 4;<br> Av. v. 23, 5. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 93.</ref> is explained by Sāyaṇa as a ‘white-breasted’ (''pāṇḍarodara'') vulture. The word may, however, well be only an adjective.^2

शिति-पृष्ठ
<u>'''Śiti-pṛṣṭha'''</u> (‘white-backed’) is the name of the Maitrāvaruṇa priest at the snake festival in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1398> xxv. 15, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 35.</ref>

शिति-बाहु ऐषकृत नैमिशि
<u>'''Śiti-[[बाहु|bāhu]] [[ऐषकृत|Aiṣakṛta]] Naimiśi'''</u> is mentioned as a sacrificer in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1399> i. 363 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 26, 192).</ref> where it is recorded that a monkey an off with his sacrificial cake.

शित्पुट
<u>'''Śitpuṭa'''</u> in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_1400> v. 5, 17, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 86.</ref> denotes, according to the commentator, a kind of cat.

शिपद
<u>'''Śipada'''</u> occurs only in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1401> vii. 50, 4.</ref> in the negative form ''a-[[शिपद|śipada]],'' together with ''a-[[शिमिद|śimida]].'' Both [[शिपद|Śipada]] and [[शिमिद|Śimida]] are perhaps names of unknown diseases.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1401> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 394.</ref>

शिपवित्नुक
<u>'''Śipavitnuka'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1402> v. 20, 7. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 262.</ref> seems to denote a species of worm.

शिप्रा
<u>'''Śiprā'''</u> is a word of somewhat uncertain sense: it seems to mean ‘cheeks’ in several passages;<ref name=fx1_ve2_1403> Rv. iii. 32, 1;<br> v. 36, 2;<br> viii. 76, 10;<br> x. 96, 9;<br> 105, 5, all according to Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' Geldner. ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 179, who treats the word as a neuter (''śipra''), takes it in i. 101, 10, as ‘lip’ (''cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 249, n.), and sees in iii. 32, 1;<br> viii. 76, 10;<br> x. 96, 9, the sense of ‘moustache.’ [[यास्क|Yāska]], [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 17, gives the alternative senses of ‘jaw’ and ‘nose.’</ref> in others<ref name=fx2_ve2_1403> Rv. v. 54, 11;<br> viii. 7, 25. Geldner, ''loc. cit.,'' here accepts ''[[शिप्रा|śiprā]]'' as ‘helmet.’</ref> it appears to  designate the ‘cheek-pieces’ of a helmet, or of the ‘bit’<ref name=fx3_ve2_1403> Rv. i. 101, 10;<br> Zimmer, ''loc. cit.''</ref> of a horse. In ''ayaḥ-śipra,'' used of the Aśvins,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1403> Rv. iv. 37, 4.</ref> and the other compounds, ''[[हिरण्य|hiraṇya]]-śipra,''<ref name=fx5_ve2_1403> Rv. ii. 34, 3.</ref> ''hari-śipra,''<ref name=fx6_ve2_1403> Rv. x. 96, 4.</ref> and ''hiri-śipra,''<ref name=fx7_ve2_1403> Rv. ii. 2, 3;<br> vi. 25, 9.</ref> the word probably has the extended sense of ‘helmet,’ described as ‘of iron,’ ‘of gold,’ or ‘yellow,’ Similarly ''śiprin''<ref name=fx8_ve2_1403> Rv. i. 29, 2;<br> 81, 4;<br> vi, 44, 14, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 301;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 39, n. 2.</ref> would mean ‘wearing a helmet.’

शिफा
<u>'''Śiphā'''</u> is found in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1404> i. 104, 3. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 18;<br> Perry, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 11, 201.</ref> where Sāyaṇa explains the word as the name of a river, quite a possible interpretation.

शिबि
<u>'''Śibi,'''</u> son of '''[[उशीनर|Uśīnara]],''' is mentioned in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1405> xxi. 18. ''Cf.'' Caland, ''Über das rituelle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 28.</ref> as a protégé of Indra, who sacrificed for him on the Varṣiṣṭhīya plain, and saved him from fear of foreign invasion.

शिमिद
<u>'''Śimida,'''</u> occurring in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1406> vii. 50, 4. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 394.</ref> in the compound ''a-śinida,'' perhaps denotes a disease. The feminine form, Śimidā, is found as the name of a demoness in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1406> iv. 25, 4.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_1406> vii. 4, 1, 27.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[शिपद|Śipada]].'''

शिम्बल
<u>'''Śimbala'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1407> iii. 53, 22. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 179;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 254.</ref> denotes, according to Sāyaṇa, the flower of the Śālmali (= '''Śalmali'''), ‘silk-cotton tree.’ 

शिम्यु
<u>'''Śimyu'''</u> occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1408> vii. 18, 5.</ref> as the name of one of the peoples or kings who were defeated by '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]]''' in the '''[[दाशराज्ञ|Dāśarājña]]''' (‘battle of the ten kings’). Since in another passage<ref name=fx2_ve2_1408> i. 100, 18, where Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' thinks that the word simply means ‘enemy.’</ref> the Śimyus are coupled with the '''Dasyus,''' Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve2_1408> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 118, 119.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 261.</ref> plausibly concludes that they were non-Āryans.

शिरिम्बिठ
<u>'''Śirimbiṭha'''</u> occurs in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1409> x. 155, 1.</ref> where the name of a man may possibly be meant, the Anukramaṇī (Index) ascribing the hymn in which the word occurs to his authorship. [[यास्क|Yāska]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_1409> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 30. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 167.</ref> however, renders the term by ‘cloud.’

शिलक शालावत्य
<u>'''Śilaka Śālāvatya'''</u> (‘descendant of Śalāvant’) is the name of a teacher, a contemporary of '''Calkitāyana [[दाल्भ्य|Dālbhya]]''' and '''Pravāhaṇa [[जैवल|Jaivala]],''' in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (i. 8, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

शिल्प
<u>'''1. Śilpa'''</u> means ‘art,’ of which three kinds--''nṛtya,'' ‘dance’; ''gīta,'' ‘song’; and ''[[वादित|vādita]],'' ‘instrumental music,’ are enumerated in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xxix. 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

शिल्प कश्यप
<u>'''2. Śilpa Kaśyapa'''</u> is named in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1412> vi. 4, 33 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 5, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> as a teacher, a pupil of '''[[कश्यप नैध्रुवि|Kaśyapa Naidhruvi]].'''

शिव
<u>'''Śiva'''</u> as the name of a people occurs once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1413> vii. 18, 7.</ref> where they share with the '''Alinas, Pakthas, Bhalānases,''' and '''Viṣāṇins''' the honour of being defeated by '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]],''' not of being, as Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_1413> ''Zur Litteratur und Geschichte des Veda,'' 95 ''et seq.;<br>'' once accepted by Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 126.</ref> thought, his allies. There can hardly be any doubt  of their identity with the <ref name=fx3_ve2_1413> Arrian, ''Indica,'' v. 12.</ref> or <ref name=fx4_ve2_1413> Diodorus, xvii. 96.</ref> of the Greeks, who dwelt between the Indus and the Akesines ('''[[असिक्नी|Asiknī]]''') in Alexander's time. The village of [[शिव|Śiva]]-pura, mentioned by the scholiast on Pāṇini<ref name=fx5_ve2_1413> iv. 2, 109. Connected with [[शिव|Śiva]] by Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 376. ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 431;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 173;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 260 ''et seq.''</ref> as situated in the northern country, may also perserve the name. ''Cf.'' '''[[शिबि|Śibi]].'''

शिशिर
<u>'''Śiśira.'''</u> See '''[[ऋतु|Ṛtu]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शिशु आङ्गिरस
<u>'''Śiśu Āṅgirasa'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[अङ्गिरस्|Aṅgiras]]'''’) is the name of the seer of a Sāman or Chant in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1415> xiii. 3, 24. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 160.</ref>

शिशुक
<u>'''Śiśuka'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1416> vi. 14, 3. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 291.</ref> seems to be an adjective meaning ‘young,’ but according to Bloomfield<ref name=fx2_ve2_1416> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 464.</ref> it has the sense of ‘foal.’ The commentator, Sāyaṇa, reads [[शुशुक|Śuśuka]], which he explains as a ‘wild animal so called.’ ''Cf.'' '''[[आशुंग|Āśuṃga]].'''

शिशुमार
<u>'''1. Śiśumāra.'''</u> See '''[[शिंशुमार|Śiṃśumāra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शिशुमार
<u>'''2. Śiśumāra'''</u> is a term applied to '''Śarkara''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiv. 5, 15), where he is called a Śiśumārarṣi, explained by the commentator to mean a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in the form of a Siśumāra.<br>==Foot Notes==

सिश्न-देव
<u>'''Siśna-deva,'''</u> occurring twice in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1419> vii. 21, 5;<br> x. 99, 3. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 118;<br> Hopkins, ''Religions of India,'' 150;<br> von Schroeder, ''Vienna Oriental Journal,'' 9, 237;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' 155;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1911, 1002, n. 5.</ref> in the plural, means ‘those who have the phallus for a deity.’ The term most probably refers to the phallus worship of the aborigines. 

शीपाल
<u>'''Śīpāla'''</u> is the name of a water plant (''Blyxa Octandra'') mentioned in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1420> x. 68, 5. ''Cf.'' the derivative adjective ''śīpalya,'' ‘overgrown with [[शीपाल|Śīpāla]] plants,’ Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 71.</ref> Its later name is Śaivala.

शीपाला
<u>'''Śīpālā'''</u> is found once in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1421> vi. 12, 3. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 71;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 289, 290;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 462.</ref> where it may mean either a ‘pool abounding in '''[[शीपाल|Śīpāla]]''' plants’ or the proper name of a river or lake.

शीपुद्रु
<u>'''Śīpudru'''</u> is merely an incorrect reading in the text of the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1422> vi. 127, 1. See Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 376.</ref> for '''[[चीपुद्रु|Cīpudru]].'''

शीर्षक्ति
<u>'''Śīrṣakti'''</u> is a common word for ‘headache’ in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1423> i. 12, 3;<br> ix. 8, 1;<br> xii. 2, 19;<br> 5, 23. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, xxxv;<br> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 252;<br> ''American Journal of Philology,'' 17, 416, who sees in it ''śīrṣasakti'' (''cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' 64, 2). Bo7htlingk, Proceedings of the Saxon Academy, 1897, 50, thinks the word means ‘a stiff neck, with head awry.’ See Lanman in Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 14. In Av. xix. 39, 10, ''śīrṣa-śoka'' is used for ‘headache.’</ref>

शीर्षण्य
<u>'''Śīrṣaṇya'''</u> in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_1424> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 5, 3;<br> 12, 3;<br> 17, 2;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 5 Sāṅkhāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]. xvii. 2, 8.</ref> denotes the ‘head’ of a couch ('''Asandī''').

शीर्षामय
<u>'''Śīrṣāmaya,'''</u> ‘disease of the head,’ is mentioned in the Atharvaveda (v. 4, 10; ix. 8, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

शीष्ट
<u>'''Śīṣṭa'''</u> occurs only in a [[वालखिल्य|Vālakhilya]] hymn of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1426> viii. 53, 4. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 163.</ref> where the word seems to be the name of an unimportant clan. 

शुक
<u>'''Śuka,'''</u> ‘parrot,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1427> i. 50, 12.</ref> where a desire is expressed to transfer to the [[शुक|Śuka]] and the '''[[रोपणाका|Ropaṇākā]]''' the yellowness of jaundice. The bird is included in the list of sacrificial victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1427> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 12, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 14;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 33;<br> and ''cf. śukababhru,'' ‘reddish, like a parrot,’ ''ibid.,'' xxiv. 2.</ref> It is described as yellow and as ‘of human speech’ (''[[पुरुष|puruṣa]]-[[वाच्|vāc]]'').<ref name=fx3_ve2_1427> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] and Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitās, ''loc. cit.''</ref> According to Bloomfield,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1427> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 352.</ref> this word is the correct reading for the second half of the obscure '''[[शारिशाका|Śāriśākā]]''' of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1427> iii. 14, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 90.</ref>

शुक्ति आङ्गिरस
<u>'''Śukti Āṅgirasa'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[अङ्गिरस्|Aṅgiras]]'''’) is the name of the seer of a Sāman or Chant in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xii. 5, 16).<br>==Foot Notes==

शुक्र
<u>'''1. Śukra,'''</u> according to Tilak,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1429> ''Orion,'' 162.</ref> has in two passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1429> iii. 32, 2;<br> ix. 46, 4.</ref> the sense of a planet. This is most improbable. ''Cf.'' '''[[मन्थिन्|Manthin]].'''

शुक्र जाबाल
<u>'''2. Śukra Jābāla'''</u> (‘descendant of Jabālā’) is the name of a teacher in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 7, 7).<br>==Foot Notes==

शुक्ल
<u>'''Śukla.'''</u> See '''[[यजुस्|Yajus]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शुक्ल-दन्त्
<u>'''Śukla-dant,'''</u> ‘white-tusked,’ is applied as an epithet to '''[[मृग|Mṛga]],''' ‘wild beast,’ in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 23, 3). ‘Elephants’ must be meant.<br>==Foot Notes==

शुच
<u>'''Śuca'''</u> and '''Śucā''' occur in an obscure verse of the Rigveda (x. 26, 6), where a man and a woman may be meant. <br>==Foot Notes==

शुचन्ति
<u>'''Śucanti'''</u> is the name of a protégé of the Aśvins in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1434> i. 112, 7. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 165.</ref>

शुचि-वृक्ष गौपालायन
<u>'''Śuci-[[वृक्ष|vṛkṣa]] Gaupālāyana'''</u> (‘descendant of Gopāla’) is the name of the priest of '''Vṛddhadyumna Abhipratāriṇa''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1435> iii. 48, 9 (Ganpalāyana in Aufrecht's edition).</ref> He is also mentioned in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1435> iii. 10, 4.</ref>

शुतुद्री
<u>'''Śutudrī,'''</u> twice mentioned in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1436> iii. 33, 1;<br> x. 75, 5;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 26.</ref> is the name of the most easterly river of the Panjab, the modern Sutlej, the Zaradros of Ptolemy and Arrian.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1436> In Arrian's time the Sutlej flowed independently into the Rann of Cutch: ''Imperial Gazetteer of India,'' 23, 179.</ref> In the post-Vedic period the name of this river appears transformed to Śatadru (‘flowing in a hundred channels’). The Sutlej has changed its course very considerably within historical times.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1436> ''Ibid.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 10, 11.</ref>

शुनः-पुच्छ
<u>'''Śunaḥ-puccha,'''</u> ‘Dog’s tail,’ is the name of a brother of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]]'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1437> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 15, 7;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], v. 20, 1.</ref>

शुनः-शेप
<u>'''Śunaḥ-śepa,'''</u> ‘Dog’s tail,’ is the name of a man with the patronymic '''[[आजीगर्ति|Ājīgarti]].''' According to a tale told in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1438> vii. 13-18.</ref> and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_1438> xv. 20, 1 ''et seq. Cf.'' xvi. 11, 2.</ref> he was purchased as a victim by '''[[रोहित|Rohita]],''' King '''Hariścandra's''' son, who had been promised by his father to Varuṇa as a sacrifice. He was actually bound to the stake, but was released in time through his supplications, supposed to be preserved in certain hymns of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1438> i. 24 ''et seq. Cf.'' v. 2, 7.</ref> He was adopted by '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]],''' to whose advice he owed the inspiration to ask the gods to release him, and became his son as '''[[देवरात|Devarāta]],''' much to the annoyance  of some of Viśvāmitra's sons, who in consequence were cursed by their father. The Rigveda, however, contains merely the statement of Śunaḥśepa's deliverance from peril of death by the divine help, and the Yajurvedas<ref name=fx4_ve2_1438> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 1, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xix. 11. The story is not found in Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 1.</ref> simply say that he was seized by Varuṇa (perhaps with dropsy),<ref name=fx5_ve2_1438> ''Cf.'' Varuna gṛhīta.<br><br>''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 408 ''et seq.;<br>'' 573 ''et seq.;<br>'' Roth, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 457;<br> ii. 112 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 47, 48;<br> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 10-16;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 355 ''et seq.;<br>'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 207;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 146;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1911, 988, 989.</ref> but saved himself from Varuṇa's bonds.

शुनस्-कर्ण
<u>'''Śunas-karṇa,'''</u> ‘Dog-ear,’ is the name of a king,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1439> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxi. 17;<br> Caland, ''Über das rituelle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 28.</ref> son of '''[[शिबि|Śibi]]''' or of Baṣkiha,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1439> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 12, 6.</ref> who performed a certain rite, the Sarvasvāra, and so died without disease.

सुन-होत्र
<u>'''Suna-hotra,'''</u> in the plural, denotes a family of seers in the Rigveda (ii. 18, 6; 41, 14. 17).<br>==Foot Notes==

शुना-सीर
<u>'''Śunā-sīra,'''</u> in the dual, occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1441> iv. 57, 5. 8.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1441> Av. iii. 17 5;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 7, 12;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xii. 69, etc.</ref> as the names of two agricultural deities, the personifications, probably, of ‘the share and the plough,’ as Roth<ref name=fx3_ve2_1441> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' For the native explanations, see Bṛhaddevatā, v. 8 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes. Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 116, 117, renders ''śunam'' adverbially as ‘successfully.’</ref> thinks.

शुनो-लाङ्गूल
<u>'''Śuno-lāṅgūla,'''</u> ‘Dog’s tail,’ is the name of a brother of '''[[शुनः-शेप|Śunaḥ-śepa]].'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1442> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 15, 7;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 20, 1.</ref> 

सुम्बल
<u>'''Sumbala'''</u> is found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1443> xii. 5, 2. 3.</ref> The meaning of the word is uncertain: Harisvāmi in his commentary takes it to be ‘straw’; Eggeling<ref name=fx2_ve2_1443> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 202, n. 3;<br> comparing Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxv. 7, 12.</ref> suggests that dried cotton fibre or pods may be meant. In any case, some substance that easily catches fire is intended.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1443> Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref>

शुल्क
<u>'''Śulka'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1444> vii. 82, 6;<br> viii. 1. 5.</ref> clearly means ‘price.’ In the [[धर्म|Dharma]] Sūtras<ref name=fx2_ve2_1444> See Foy, ''Die Ro7nigliche Gewalt,'' 39 ''et seq.''</ref> it denotes a ‘tax,’ a sense which is found by Muir<ref name=fx3_ve2_1444> ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 310.</ref> in a passage of the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1444> iii. 29, 3.</ref> where ''[[शुक्ल|śukla]]'' is read in the edition with great detriment to the sense. This correction is accepted by Bloomfield<ref name=fx5_ve2_1444> ''Hymns of the Atharvida,'' 434.</ref> and by Whitney.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1444> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 136.</ref> In another passage the same change made by Weber<ref name=fx7_ve2_1444> ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 304.</ref> is not accepted by Whitney,<ref name=fx8_ve2_1444> ''Op, cit.'' 253.</ref> and doubtfully by Bloomfield.<ref name=fx9_ve2_1444> ''Loc. cit.'' ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 413.</ref>

शुशुक
<u>'''Śuśuka.'''</u> See '''Aśuṃga''' and '''[[शिशुक|Śiśuka]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शुशुलूक
<u>'''Śuśulūka'''</u> is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1446> vii. 104, 22.</ref> in the compound ''śuśulūkayātu,'' the name of a demon. According to Sāyaṇa, the word means a ‘small owl.’ It appears in the feminine form, Śuśulūkā, in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1446> iii. 14, 17. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 93.</ref>

शुष्क-भृङ्गार
<u>'''Śuṣka-bhṛṅgāra'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the Kauṣitaki [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1447> ii. 6. ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta '''[[सूत्र|Sūtra]],''' xvii. 7, 13.</ref>

सुश्मिण
<u>'''Suśmiṇa'''</u> is a name of '''Amitratapana,''' a king of the '''Śibis,''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 23, 10). <br>==Foot Notes==

शूद्र
<u>'''Śūdra'''</u> is the designation of the fourth caste in the Vedic state (see '''[[वर्ण|Varṇa]]'''). It is quite unknown in the Rigveda except in the Puruṣasūkta<ref name=fx1_ve2_1449> x. 90, 12. See Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 8 ''et seq.''</ref> (‘hymn of man’) in the tenth Maṇḍla, where is the earliest version of the origin of the castes the Śudra for the first time appears. The Rigveda, on the other hand, knows '''[[दस्यु|Dasyu]]''' and '''[[दास|Dāsa]],''' both as aborigines independent of Āryan control and as subjugated slaves: it is reasonable to reckon the [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] of the later texts as belonging to the aborigines who had been reduced to subjection by the Āryans. Strictly speaking, the defeated aborigines must have been regarded as slaves, but it is obvious that, except on occasions when most of the men were slain, which may have occurred quite often, there must have remained too many of them to be used as slaves of individual owners. The villages of the aborigines must have continued to subsist, but under Āryan lordship and control: there may be this amount of truth in Baden Powell's theory, which practically traced all the early cultivating villages in India to Dravidian origin. On the other hand, the term [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] would also cover the wild hill tribes which lived by hunting and fishing, and many of which would acknowledge the superiority of their Āryan neighbours: it could, in fact, be applied to all beyond the pale of the Āryan state.<br><br>This view of the [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] suits adequately the Vedic references to his condition, which would not apply adequately to domestic slaves only. The [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] is continually opposed to the Āryan,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1449> Av. iv. 20, 4;<br> xix. 32, 8;<br> 62, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiv. 30;<br> xxiii. 30. 31;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 10, 2;<br> vii. 4, 19, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], iv. 7;<br> xvii. 5;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 8, 6;<br> iii. 13, 1, etc. See also '''[[आर्य|Ārya]]''' and '''Arya.''' In [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 3, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xx. 17;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxviii. 5, '''Sūdra''' is opposed to '''Arya.'''</ref> and the colour of the [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] is compared with that of the Āryan,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1449> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 5;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 17. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 4, 4, 9;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 4, 25;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 4, 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 6, 7;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 4;<br> Muir, ''op. cit.,'' 1^2, 140;<br> Mahābhārata, xii. 188, 5.</ref> just as his ways are so contrasted.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1449> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 17, 3. 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 24.</ref> The [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx5_ve2_1449> vii. 29, 4;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 439.</ref> in its account of the castes, declares that the  [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] is ''anyasya [[प्रेष्य|preṣya]],'' ‘the servant of another’; ''kāmotthāpya,'' ‘to be expelled at will’; and ''yathākāmavadhya,'' ‘to be slain at will.’ All these terms well enough describe the position of the serf as the result of a conquest: the epithets might have been applied to the English serf after the Norman Conquest with but slight inaccuracy, especially if his master had received a grant of jurisdiction from the Crown. The [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx6_ve2_1449> vi. 1. 11.</ref> explains that even if prosperous (''bahu-[[पशु|paśu]],'' ‘having many cows’) a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] could not be other than a servant: his business was ''pādāvanejya,'' ‘the washing of the feet’ of his superiors. The Mahābhārata<ref name=fx7_ve2_1449> xii. 30, 7 (Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 73). The same text, xii. 294, 21 (''ibid.,'' 74, n.). insists on his duty of service.</ref> says out and out that a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] has no property (''na hi svam asti śūdrasya,'' ‘the [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] has nothing he can call his own’). On the other hand, just as in England the royal justice would protect the serf in life and limb,<ref name=fx8_ve2_1449> Pollock and Maitland, ''History of English Law,'' 1, 350, 355, etc.</ref> so it appears that the slaying of a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] involved a wergeld of ten cows according to both [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]]<ref name=fx9_ve2_1449> [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 10, 19, 1.</ref> and Āpastamba.<ref name=fx10_ve2_1449> [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 9, 24, 3.</ref> It may, indeed, be held that this wergeld was only due in case of murder by another than the master, but such limitation is nowhere stated.<br><br>In sacred matters the distinction between Āryan and '''[[शूद्र|Śūdra]]''' was, of course, specially marked. The texts<ref name=fx11_ve2_1449> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 4, 2;<br> iv. 2, 2, 14, etc. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xvi. ''et seq.;<br>'' 26, 292. ''Cf.'' '''Hopkins,''' ''op, cit.,'' 13, 73, 75, n.</ref> do not hesitate to declare that the upper castes were ‘all,’ ignoring the Śūdras; the [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] is prohibited<ref name=fx12_ve2_1449> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxi. 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 1, 3. So the ''[[स्थाली|sthālī]],'' ‘cooking vessel,’ is to be prepared by an Āryan, Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 8, 3.</ref> from milking the cow for the milk required at the Agnihotra (‘oblation to Agni’); and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx13_ve2_1449> iii. 1, 1. 10. ''Cf.'' v. 3, 2, 2.</ref> forbids a man who has been consecrated (''dīkṣita'') for a sacrifice to speak to a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] at all for the time, though the Śāṭyāyanaka<ref name=fx14_ve2_1449> Quoted by Āpastamba, cited in the scholiast on Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], vii. 5, 7. The sense is not quite certain, but that given in the text seems reasonable. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 10, 11.</ref> seems to have relaxed this rule by confining it to cases in which the [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] was guilty of some sin.  At the sacrifice itself the [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] could not be present in the ''[[शाला|śālā]],'' ‘hall’; he is definitely classed in the Śatapatha Brāhmáṇa<ref name=fx15_ve2_1449> iii. 1, 1, 10. See also Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 1, 6;<br> Lévi ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 82.</ref> and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx16_ve2_1449> vi. 1, 11.</ref> as unfit for ‘sacrifice’ (''ayajñiya''); and declared in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx17_ve2_1449> xi. 10, where he therefore does not receive '''Karīras.'''</ref> not to be admitted to drink Soma. At the Pravargya (introductory Soma) rite the performer is not allowed to come in contact with a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]],<ref name=fx18_ve2_1449> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1, 1, 34.</ref> who here, as in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx17_ve2_1449/> is reckoned as excluded from a share in the Soma-draught. On the other hand, the [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] is one of the victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]],<ref name=fx19_ve2_1449> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 1, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 6, 2, 10. He is also present at the '''[[राजसूय|Rājasūya]],''' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 1.</ref> and a fight between an Āryan and a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]], in which, of course, the former wins, forms a part of the Mahāvrata rite, being perhaps a precursor of the Indian drama.<ref name=fx20_ve2_1449> Keith, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 64, 534.</ref><br><br>Other indications, however, exist, showing that it would be undesirable to ignore the real importance of the [[शूद्र|Śūdra]], which again reminds us of the condition of the serf, who, though legally restrained, still gradually won his way to the rank of a free man. Rich Śūdras are mentioned in the early texts,<ref name=fx21_ve2_1449> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 7, 10;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 1, 11. Some of the kings' ministers were Śūdras;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 2, 2, with Sāyaṇa's note.</ref> just as [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] ''gahapatis,'' ‘householders,’ occur in the Buddhist texts, and [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] kings in the legal literature.<ref name=fx22_ve2_1449> Foy, ''Die ko7nigliche Gewalt,'' 8;<br> Fick, ''Die sociale Gliederung,'' 83, 84. See Manu, iv. 61;<br> Viṣṇu, lxxi. 64;<br> perhaps Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 5. But see Roth's emendation, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, ccxliii.</ref> Sin against [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] and Āryan is mentioned;<ref name=fx23_ve2_1449> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhiṭā, xxxviii. 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 3, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xx. 17.</ref> prayers for glory on behalf of Śūdras, as well as of the other castes<ref name=fx24_ve2_1449> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 7, 6, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xl. 13;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 48, On the other hand, the [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] uses magic just as an [[आर्य|Ārya]] does, Av. x. 1, 3.</ref> occur; and the desire to be dear to [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] as well as to Āryan is expressed.<ref name=fx25_ve2_1449> Av. xix. 32, 8;<br> 62, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxvi. 2, etc.</ref> <br><br>The Sūtras also, while they emphasize as general rules points earlier not insisted on, such as their inferiority in sitting, etc.,<ref name=fx26_ve2_1449> [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 7;<br> Āpastamba [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ii. 10, 27, 15, So he can be insulted with impunity, [[गौतम|Gautama]], xii. 13, and is punished for insult by mutilation, ''ibid.,'' xii. 1;<br> Āpastamba, ii. 10, 27, 14.</ref> their exclusion from the study of the Vedas,<ref name=fx27_ve2_1449> [[गौतम|Gautama]], xii. 4-6.</ref> the danger of contact with them<ref name=fx28_ve2_1449> Āpastamba, i. 5, 17, 1;<br> ii. 2, 3, 4, etc.</ref> or their food,<ref name=fx29_ve2_1449> Āpastamba, i. 5, 16, 2, etc.</ref> still recognize that Śūdras can be merchants,<ref name=fx30_ve2_1449> [[गौतम|Gautama]], x. 60. ''Cf.'' x. 50-67 for an exhaustive account of the Śūdra's duties in theory. His relations to his master are those of mutual support.</ref> or even exercise any trade.<ref name=fx31_ve2_1449> Viṣṇu, ii. 14.</ref><br><br>Moreover, the Sūtras<ref name=fx32_ve2_1449> Pāraskara [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 4, 11. Rules to the contrary (''e.g.,'' Gobhila [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 2, 52) are for special occasions. See Weber, ''op. cit.,'' 10, 74. On the other hand, criminal intercourse of a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] and an Āryan woman is severely punished in the Sūtras. See Āpastamba, i. 10, 26, 20;<br> 27, 9;<br> [[गौतम|Gautama]], xii. 2. 3.</ref> permit the marriage of a [[शूद्रा|Śūdrā]] woman with members of all castes. Though it was a reproach to '''[[वत्स|Vatsa]]'''<ref name=fx33_ve2_1449> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 6, 6.</ref> and to '''[[कवष|Kavaṣa]]'''<ref name=fx34_ve2_1449> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 19, 1.</ref> that they were the sons of a [[शूद्रा|Śūdrā]] and a Dāsī respectively, still the possibility of such a reproach shows that marriages of this kind did take place. Moreover, illicit unions of [[आर्य|Ārya]] and [[शूद्रा|Śūdrā]], or [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] and Āryā, are referred to in the Saṃhitās of the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx35_ve2_1449> [[आर्य|Ārya]] and [[शूद्रा|Śūdrā]]: Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 30;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 19, 3;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 13, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], iv. 8;<br> [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] and Āryā: Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 31. This verse the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] no doubt deliberately ignores.</ref><br><br>The origin of the term [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] is quite obscure, but Zimmer<ref name=fx36_ve2_1449> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 216, 435.</ref> points out that Ptolemy<ref name=fx37_ve2_1449> vi. 20.</ref> mentions  as a people, and he thinks that the Brāhui may be meant. Without laying any stress on this identification,<ref name=fx38_ve2_1449> The Brāhui are now held not to be Dravidian ethnologically, but TurcoIranian (''Indian Empire,'' 1, 292, 310). It is suggested (''ibid.,'' 1, 382) that they represent the original Dravidian type, which in India has been merged in the Muṇḍā type;<br> but this suggestion is invalidated by the fact that the Rigveda speaks of the Dasyus as ''[[अनास्|anās]],'' ‘noseless’ (''cf.'' '''[[दस्यु|Dasyu]],''' 1, 347, n. 7). a term admirably applicable to Dravidians, but ludicrous as applied to the TurcoIranian type. It is much more plausible to assume that the Brāhuis are a mixed race, which in course of time has lost most of its Dravidian features. On the relation of Dravidians and speakers of Muṇḍā tongues, the Vedic texts throw no light.</ref> it is reasonable to accept the  view<ref name=fx39_ve2_1449> See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 85, 255;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda. 3, 212;<br> Fick, ''Die sociale Gliederung,'' 201, 202.<br><br>''Cf.'' von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 154, 155;<br> Jolly, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 50, 515;<br> Fick, ''Die sociale Gliederung,'' 201 ''et seq.,'' Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 54;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 73 ''et seq.'' (for the [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] in the Epic);<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 191, ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 18, 77, 111, 112, 276;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 4 ''et seq.;<br>'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 8 ''et seq.''</ref> that the term was originally the name of a large tribe opposed to the Āryan invasion. See also '''[[निषाद|Niṣāda]].'''

शूद्रा
<u>'''Śūdrā'''</u> denoted a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] woman in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1450> v. 22. 7 (= Dāsī, v. 22, 6).</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1450> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 19, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], iv. 8;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 13, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 30, etc.;<br> ''śūdrāputra,'' ‘son of a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] woman,’ [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 6, 6.</ref>

शूर
<u>'''Śūra'''</u> is the regular word in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1451> i. 70, 11;<br> 101, 6;<br> 141, 8;<br> 158, 3;<br> ii. 17, 2;<br> 30, 10, etc.</ref> and occasionally later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1451> Av. viii. 8, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 34;<br> xx. 37, etc. (of gods, Indra and Agni);<br> ''[[शूर|śūra]]-[[वीर|vīra]],'' Av. viii. 5, 1.</ref> to denote a ‘hero’ or ‘brave warrior.’

शूर-वीर माण्डूक्य
<u>'''Śūra-[[वीर|vīra]] Māṇḍūkya'''</u> (‘descendant of Maṇḍūka’) is the name of a teacher in the Āraṇyakas of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1452> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 1, 1, 3, 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, vii. 2. 8. 9. 10 (where the name is read Śauravīra).</ref>

शूर्प
<u>'''Śūrpa'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1453> ix. 6, 16;<br> x. 9, 26;<br> xi. 3, 4;<br> xii. 3, 19 ''et seq.;<br>'' xx. 136, 8.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1453> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 5, 4;<br> iii. 2, 5, 11. etc.</ref> denotes a wickerwork basket for winnowing grain. It is called ''[[वर्ष|varṣa]]-vṛddha,'' ‘swollen by rain,’ in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1453> xii. 3, 19.</ref> which shows, as Zimmer<ref name=fx4_ve2_1453> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 238.<br><br>''Cf.'' Lanman in Whitney's Translation of the Atharvaveda, 686;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharavaveda,'' 649.</ref> says, that it was sometimes made of reeds, not of dry wood. 

शूल
<u>'''Śūla,'''</u> denoting the ‘spit,’ used for roasting flesh on, is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1454> i. 162, 11.</ref> and the later Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1454> Śatapatha Brāhmaṇ, xi. 4, 2, 4;<br> 7, 3, 2;<br> 4, 3;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vii. 15, 3 (used at cremation and sugrestive of roasting). The [[शूल|Śūla]], as the weapon of Rudra, is not mentioned till the late Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 11. In the post-Vedic language the ''tri-[[शूल|śūla]],'' or ‘trident,’ is the regular emblem of [[शिव|Śiva]].<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 271.</ref>

सुष वार्ष्ण
<u>'''1. Suṣa Vārṣṇa'''</u> (‘descendant of Vṛṣṇi’) is mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Brāhmaṇ (iii. 10, 9, 15) as having been honoured by a consecration with Āditya.<br>==Foot Notes==

शूष वाह्नेय
<u>'''2. Śūṣa Vāhneya'''</u> (‘descendant of Vahni’) '''[[भारद्वाज|Bhāradvāja]]''' (‘descendant of '''[[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]]'''’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of Arāḍa [[दात्रेय|Dātreya]] '''[[शौनक|Śaunaka]],''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1456> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Śruṣa.'''

शृङ्ग
<u>'''Śṛṅga'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1457> i. 140, 6;<br> 163, 11;<br> ii. 39, 3;<br> iii. 8. 10, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1457> Av. ii. 32, 6;<br> viii. 6, 14;<br> ix. 4, 17, etc.</ref> denotes the ‘horn’ of any sort of animal. Hence the ‘barb’ of the arrow is called its horn in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1457> iv. 6, 5. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 154.</ref>

शृङ्ग-वृष्
<u>'''Śṛṅga-vṛṣ'''</u> is the name of a man in one hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1458> viii. 17, 13.</ref> According to Ludwig,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1458> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 161.<br><br>''Cf.'' Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 142, n.</ref> he is father of '''[[पृदाकुसानु|Pṛdākusānu]].'''

शेरभ
<u>'''Śerabha'''</u> and '''Śerabhaka''' are names of snakes or demons in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1459> ii. 24, 1. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 64.</ref>

शेव-धि
<u>'''Śeva-dhi'''</u> denotes ‘treasure’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1460> ii. 13, 6;<br> vii. 53, 5;<br> ix. 3, 15 (metaphorically). ''Cf.'' viii. 52, 9.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1460> Av. v. 22, 14;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 59, etc.</ref> 

शेवृध
<u>'''Śevṛdha'''</u> and '''Śevṛdhaka''' are the names of snakes or demons in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1461> ii. 24, 1. ''Cf.'' Whitney Translation of the Atharvaveda, 64.</ref>

शेषण
<u>'''Śeṣaṇa'''</u> in the Atharvaveda (vii. 109, 5), means the ‘leaving’ of the dice as opposed to Glahana (''grahaṇa''), the ‘taking up’ of them for the throw. ''Cf.'' '''[[ग्लह|Glaha]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शेषस्
<u>'''Śeṣas'''</u> denotes ‘offspring’ in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1463> i. 93, 4;<br> v. 12, 6;<br> 70, 4;<br> vi. 27, 4. 5;<br> vii. 1, 12;<br> 4, 7;<br> x. 16, 5.</ref>

शैब्य
<u>'''Śaibya,'''</u> ‘belonging to the '''Śibis,'''’ is a designation of king Amitratapana Śuṣmiṇa in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 23, 10). In the [[प्रश्न|Praśna]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (i. 1; v. 1) [[शैब्य|Śaibya]] is the patronymic of a teacher, '''[[सत्यकाम|Satyakāma]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

शैलन
<u>'''Śailana,'''</u> in the plural, is the name of a school of teachers in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 2, 3; ii. 4, 6).<br>==Foot Notes==

सैलालि
<u>'''Sailāli,'''</u> ‘descendant of Śilālin,’ is the name of a ritual teacher in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1466> xiii. 5, 3, 3.</ref> A Śailāli [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] is mentioned in the Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_1466> vi. 4, 7.</ref> and the school of the Śailālins often occurs in the Śūtras.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1466> Anupada [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 5, etc. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 156;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 197. who compares the Naṭa [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] attributed to Śilālin by Pāṇni, iv. 2, 110, 111.</ref>

शैलिन
<u>'''Śailina'''</u> or '''Śailini,''' ‘descendant of Śilina,’ is the patronymic of '''Jitvan''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1467> [[शैलिन|Śailina]] in Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1, 5 Mādhyaṃdina: Śailini. iv. 1, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]. ''Cf.'' Max Mūller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 15, 152, n. 2.</ref> Perhaps '''[[शैलन|Śailana]]''' should be compared. 

शैलूष
<u>'''Śailūṣa'''</u> is included in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1468> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 2, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 290;<br> Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 111, 196, 197. The exact sense of [[शैलूष|Śailūṣa]] depends on the question of how old the drama is in India. As to this, ''cf.'' '''[[इतिहास|Itihāsa]];<br>''' Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1911, 995 ''et seq.''</ref> An ‘actor’ or ‘dancer’ may be meant. Sāyaṇa says it is a man who lives on the prostitution of his wife.

शोण सात्रासाह
<u>'''Śoṇa Sātrāsāha,'''</u> king of '''[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]]''' and father of '''Koka,''' is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1469> xiii. 5, 4, 16-18. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 400.</ref> as having offered the horse sacrifice, which was attended by the '''Turvaśas''' also.

शौङ्गायनि
<u>'''Śauṅgāyani,'''</u> ‘descendant of Śauṅga,’ is the name of a teacher in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1470> Indische Studien, 4, 372, 383. The Śuṅgas are known as teachers in the Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 13, 5. etc.</ref>

शौङ्गी-पुत्र
<u>'''Śauṅgī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of Śuṅga,’ is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[सांकृती-पुत्र|Sāṃkṛtī-putra]]''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1471> vi. 4, 31 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 5, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref>

शौच
<u>'''Śauca'''</u> (‘descendant of Śuci’) is the patronymic of a man, called also '''[[आह्नेय|Āhneya]],''' who is mentioned as a teacher in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka (ii. 12).<br>==Foot Notes==

शौचद्-रथ
<u>'''Śaucad-ratha'''</u> (‘descendant of Śucad-ratha’) is the patronymic of '''Sunītha''' in the Rigveda (v. 79, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

शौचेय
<u>'''Śauceya'''</u> (‘descendant of Śuci’) '''[[प्राचीनयोग्य|Prācīnayogya]]''' (‘descendant of Prācīnayoga’) is the name of a teacher in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xi. 5, 3, 1. 8). [[शौचेय|Śauceya]] is also the patronymic of '''[[सार्वसेनि|Sārvaseni]]''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (vii. 1, 10, 2). <br>==Foot Notes==

शौनक
<u>'''Śaunaka,'''</u> ‘descendant of Śunaka,’ is a common patronymic. It is applied to '''[[इन्द्रोत|Indrota]]'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1475> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 3, 5;<br> 4, 1.</ref> and '''[[स्वैदायन|Svaidāyana]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1475> ''Ibid.,'' xi. 4, 1, 2.</ref> A [[शौनक|Śaunaka]] appears as a teacher of '''[[रौहिणायन|Rauhiṇāyana]]''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_1475> ii. 5, 20;<br> iv. 5, 26 Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> A [[शौनक|Śaunaka]]-yajña, or [[शौनक|Śaunaka]] sacrifice, occurs in the Kauṣitaki [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_1475> iv. 7.</ref> In the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_1475> i. 9, 3.</ref> '''Atidhanvan''' [[शौनक|Śaunaka]] appears as a teacher. That [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx6_ve2_1475> iv. 3, 5. 7.</ref> and the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx7_ve2_1475> iii. 1, 21.</ref> mention a [[शौनक|Śaunaka]] [[कापेय|Kāpeya]] who was a contemporary of '''[[अभिप्रतारिन् काक्षसेनि|Abhipratārin Kākṣaseni]],''' whose [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] [[शौनक|Śaunaka]] was according to another passage<ref name=fx8_ve2_1475> i. 59, 2.</ref> of the latter [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]. In the Sūtras, the Bṛhaddevatā, etc., a [[शौनक|Śaunaka]] appears as a great authority on grammatical, ritual, and other matters.<ref name=fx9_ve2_1475> ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 24, 32-34, 49, 54, 56, 59, 62, 85, 143;<br> Macdonell, ''Bṛhaddevatā,'' 1, xxiii;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 18, 19, 297.</ref>

शौनकी-पुत्र
<u>'''Śaunakī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of Śunaka,’ is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[काश्यपीबालाक्यामाठरीपुत्र|Kāśyapībālākyāmāṭharīputra]]''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 4, 30. 31).<br>==Foot Notes==

शौर्प-णाय्य
<u>'''Śaurpa-ṇāyya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Śūrpaṇāya,’ is the patronymic of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[गौतम|Gautama]],''' in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) in the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (ii. 5, 20; iv. 5, 26).<br>==Foot Notes==

शौल्बायन
<u>'''Śaulbāyana'''</u> or '''Śaulvāyana,''' ‘descendant of Śulba,’ is the patronymic of a teacher, '''Udaṅka.'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1478> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 5, 4;<br> 5, 4, 2;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1, 2 Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> According to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_1478> xi. 4, 2, 17 ''et seq.''</ref> a [[शौल्बायन|Śaulbāyana]] was the [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]], or sacrificing priest, of those who had '''[[अयस्थूण|Ayasthūṇa]]''' as Gṛhapati (‘householder,’ the title of the sacrificer who has precedence at a ''sattra,'' or sacrificial session). 

शौष्कल
<u>'''Śauṣkala'''</u> is the name of one of the sacrificial victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1479> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 16;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 12, 1. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 81, n. 7;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 415.</ref> It means, according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ‘living on dried fish or flesh,’<ref name=fx2_ve2_1479> The literal meaning is, ‘relating to what is dried’ (''śuṣkala'').</ref> or, according to the native lexicographers, ‘selling dried fish,’ while, Sāyaṇa's commentary on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] explains the meaning to be one who catches fish with a hook, ‘angler.’

श्रुष्टि आङ्गिरस
<u>'''Śruṣṭi Āṅgirasa'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[अङ्गिरस्|Aṅgiras]]'''’) is the name of the seer of a Sāman or Chant in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1480> xiii. 11, 21. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 160;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 68.</ref>

श्मशान
<u>'''Śmaśāna'''</u> is the name of the ‘burial mound’ in which the bones of the dead man were laid to rest (''cf.'' '''[[अन्अग्निदग्ध|Anagnidagdha]]'''). It is mentioned in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1481> v. 31, 8;<br> x. 1. 18.</ref> and often later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1481> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 8, 5;<br> 4, 11, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxi. 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 7;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 5, 2, 15, etc.</ref> The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_1481> xiii. 8, 1, 1 ''et seq. Cf.'' Eggeling. ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 424 ''et seq.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 407;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, cliii.</ref> prescribes a four-cornered mound facing the south-east, on ground inclined to the north, out of sight of the village, in a peaceful spot amid beautiful surroundings, or on barren ground. For an Agni-cit (‘builder of a fire-latar’) a funeral mound like a fire-altar is prescribed. The Easterners (''Prācyāḥ'') made their mounds round.

श्मश्रु
<u>'''Śmaśru'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1482> ii. 11, 17;<br> viii. 33, 6;<br> x. 23, 1, 4;<br> 26, 7;<br> 142, 4.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1482> Av. v. 19, 14;<br> vi. 68, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 92;<br> xx. 5, etc. Applied to animals, ''ibid.,'' xxv. 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 9, 1, 6, etc.</ref> means ‘beard’ and ‘moustache,’ being sometimes contrasted with '''[[केश|Keśa]],'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1482> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 5, 2, 48, etc.</ref> ‘hair of the head.’ Shaving was known (see '''[[वप्तृ|Vaptṛ]]''' and '''[[क्षुर|Kṣura]]'''). The  wearing of a beard was a sign of manhood according to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1482> v. 5, 1, 1.</ref> with which agrees the notice of Megasthenes<ref name=fx5_ve2_1482> In Diodorus, iii. 63.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 265267.</ref> that the Indians carefully tended their beards up to the day of their death.

श्यापर्ण सायकायन
<u>'''Śyāparṇa Sāyakāyana'''</u> is the name of a man, the last for whom five victims were slain at the building of the sacrificial altar according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1483> vi. 2, 1, 39.</ref> The same text<ref name=fx2_ve2_1483> ix. 5, 2, 1.</ref> again mentions him as a builder of the fire-altar. He must have been connected in some way with the '''Salvas.'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1483> x. 4, 1, 10.</ref> His family, the Śyāparṇas, appear in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_1483> vii. 27. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 43, 344, 345;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 437 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indisches Studien,'' 1, 215, 216.</ref> as a self-assertive family of priests whom king '''Viśvantara''' excluded from his sacrifice, but whose leader, '''[[राम मार्गवेय|Rāma Mārgaveya]],''' induced him to take them back. In some way Śyāparṇa was connected with the defeat of the '''Pañcālas''' by the '''Kuntis.'''<ref name=fx5_ve2_1483> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 471.</ref>

श्याम
<u>'''Śyāma'''</u> (‘swarthy’) with '''Ayas''' (‘metal’) in all probability denotes ‘iron’ in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1484> xi. 3, 7.</ref> [[श्याम|Śyāma]] alone has the same sense in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1484> ix. 5, 4.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1484> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 7. 5, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xviii. 10;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 11, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 13.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 52, 54;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 189.</ref>

श्याम-जयन्त लौहित्य
<u>'''Śyāma-[[जयन्त|jayanta]] Lauhitya'''</u> (‘descendant of Lohita’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[जयन्त|Jayanta]] [[पाराशर्य|Pārāśarya]],''' in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Jiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 42, 1). Another man of the same name occurs in the same place as a pupil of '''[[मित्रभूति लौहित्य|Mitrabhūti Lauhitya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

श्याम-पर्ण
<u>'''Śyāma-parṇa'''</u> is, in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1486> xx. 8 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 472).</ref> and Maitrāyaṇī<ref name=fx2_ve2_1486>iii. 2, 7.</ref> Saṃhitās, the name of a man who was instructed by '''[[सोमदक्ष कौश्रेय|Somadakṣa Kauśreya]].''' 

श्याम-सुजयन्त लौहित्य
<u>'''Śyāma-sujayanta Lauhitya'''</u> (‘descendant of Lohita’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[कृष्णधृति सात्यकि|Kṛṣṇadhṛti Sātyaki]],''' in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 42, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

श्यामाक
<u>'''Śyāmāka'''</u> is the name of a cultivated millet (''Panicum frumentaceum'') in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_1488> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 1, 2;<br> ii. 3, 2, 6;<br> iv. 7, 4, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 11, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 12;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, x. 2.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1488> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 6, 3, 2;<br> xii. 7, 1, 9, etc.;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 12.</ref> The lightness of its seed is alluded to in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1488> xix. 50, 4.</ref> where it is spoken of as blown away by the wind. There it is also mentioned as the food of pigeons.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1488> xx. 135, 12.</ref> The [[श्यामाक|Śyāmāka]] and its seed ('''[[तण्डुल|Taṇḍula]]''') are referred to as very small in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx5_ve2_1488> iii. 14, 3.</ref> where Max Müller<ref name=fx6_ve2_1488> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 1, 48.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 241, 275.</ref> renders it as ‘canary seed.’

श्याव
<u>'''1. Śyāva'''</u> is the name of a protégé of the Aśvins in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1489> i. 117, 24;<br> x. 65, 2. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 150;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 32.</ref> He may be identical with '''[[हिरण्यहस्त|Hiraṇyahasta]].'''

श्याव
<u>'''2. Śyāva'''</u> is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1490> viii. 19, 37. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 161.</ref> as a generous donor on the '''[[सुवास्तु|Suvāstu]]''' river.

श्याव
<u>'''3. Śyāva'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda (v. 61, 9) seems clearly, as Sāyaṇa thinks, to denote '''[[श्यावाश्व|Śyāvāśva]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

श्यावक
<u>'''Śyāvaka'''</u> is mentioned as a sacrificer and friend of Indra in the Rigveda (viii. 3, 12; 4, 2). He may be identical with 2. '''[[श्याव|Śyāva]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

श्यावसायन
<u>'''Śyāvasāyana'''</u> is the patronymic of '''Devataras''' in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 40, 2). The form is perhaps an error for '''Śāvasāyana.''' <br>==Foot Notes==

श्यावाश्व
<u>'''Śyāvāśva'''</u> is the name of a man mentioned several times in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1494> v. 52, 1;<br> 61, 5. 9 (Syāva, a short form of the name, is here used);<br> 81, 5;<br> viii. 35, 19;<br> 36, 7;<br> 37, 7;<br> 38, 8.</ref> The Anukramaṇī (Index) assigns to him a series of hymns in the fifth, eight, and ninth books.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1494> v. 52-61;<br> 81;<br> 82;<br> viii. 35-38;<br> ix. 32.</ref> In one of the hymns<ref name=fx3_ve2_1494> v. 61.</ref> [[श्यावाश्व|Śyāvāśva]] mentions, apparently as his patrons, '''[[तरन्त|Taranta]]''' (a son of '''Vidadaśva''') and '''Purumīlha,''' as well as '''Rathavīti.''' On this hymn is based a legend found in the Bṛhaddevatā,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1494> v. 49 ''et seq.'' See also Ṣaḍguruśiṣya on Anukramaṇī to Rv. v. 61 (ed. Macdonell, p. 117 ''et seq.'');<br> Sāyaṇa on Rv. v. 61, 17-19;<br> Nītimañjarī in Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 50 ''et seq.''</ref> that he was the son of '''[[अर्चनानस्|Arcanānas]],''' who was sacrificing for Rathavīti [[दाल्भ्य|Dālbhya]]. The father was anxious to obtain the king's daughter for his son in marriage; but though the father was willing, his wife insisted on her son-in-law being a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]]. The father and son, repulsed, were returning home, when they met on the way [[तरन्त|Taranta]] and Purumīḍha, former patrons of the father. These showed him respect, while Taranta's wife, Śaśīyasī, presented [[श्यावाश्व|Śyāvāśva]] with much wealth. The son was then fortunate enough to meet the Maruts in the forest, and praised them, thus becoming a seer. As a result the king himself ultimately offered his daughter to [[श्यावाश्व|Śyāvāśva]]. Sieg<ref name=fx5_ve2_1494> ''Op. cit.;<br>'' 50-60. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 148.</ref> seeks to show that this legend is presupposed in the Rigveda; but it is difficult to accept this view, since the references in the Rigveda are very obscure, and Śaśīyasī is probably no more than an epithet.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1494> v. 61, 6. The word is taken as an epithet by Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' and by Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 27.</ref> That there is some [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]] at the back of the hymn is clear: what it is can hardly now be determined.<br><br>Śyāvāśva's obtaining gifts from [[वैदद्अश्वि|Vaidadaśvi]] is referred to also in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx7_ve2_1494> xvi. 11, 7-9.</ref> His name occurs in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx8_ve2_1494> iv. 29. 4;<br> xviii. 3, 15.</ref> in two lists of persons, of which the former includes Purumīḍha, the latter also [[अर्चनानस्|Arcanānas]] and Atri. A Sāman is ascribed to him in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx9_ve2_1494> viii. 5. 9. Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 27, n. 4, bases on this an improbable conjeciure that he was a [[क्षत्रिय|Kṣatriya]].</ref> and he is perhaps referred to in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx10_ve2_1494> i. 11, 2. But ''cf.'' Sieg, ''op. cit.,'' 61, n. 4, who takes the word adjectivally, as in Av. xi. 2, 18, [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xix. 33, 26.</ref> In the  [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx11_ve2_1494> viii. 5, 9.</ref> he is styled Ārcanānasa, ‘son of [[अर्चनानस्|Arcanānas]],’ and later<ref name=fx12_ve2_1494> The Anukramaṇī calls him and his father [[आत्रेय|Ātreya]]. In the passages from book viii. of the Rv., cited in n. 1, Atri is mentioned with him.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 126, 127;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 214;<br> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 354;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 359 ''et seq.;<br>'' Lévi, ''Ea Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 122.</ref> he is called [[आत्रेय|Ātreya]], ‘descendant of Atri.’

श्येन
<u>'''Śyena'''</u> is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1495> i. 32, 14;<br> 33, 2;<br> 118, 11;<br> 163, 1;<br> 165, 2, etc.</ref> of a strong bird of prey, most probably the ‘eagle’; later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1495> Av. iii. 3, 4;<br> vii. 41, 2;<br> xi. 9, 9, etc.</ref> (as in post-Vedic Sanskrit) it seems to mean the ‘falcon’ or ‘hawk.’ It is the swiftest of birds,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1495> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 7, 1;<br> v. 4, 11, 1;<br> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8.</ref> and a source of terror to smaller birds.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1495> Rv. ii. 42, 2;<br> Av. v. 21, 6.</ref> It is the strongest of birds,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1495> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 14.</ref> and even attacks herds.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1495> Rv. iv. 38, 5. This corresponds well enough with the eagle's known habit of carrying off young lambs.</ref> It watches over men (''[[नृ|nṛ]]-cakṣas''),<ref name=fx7_ve2_1495> Av. vii. 41, 2.</ref> a reference, no doubt, to its lofty flight in air. It brings the Soma from heaven.<ref name=fx8_ve2_1495> See Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 1-24, who cites all relevant passages.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 87, 88, who points out that the epithet ''ṛjipya,'' ‘flying upwards,’ applied to the eagle, appears as an actual name of the eagle in Iranian.</ref>

श्रपयितृ
<u>'''Śrapayitṛ,'''</u> ‘cook,’ is a term mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i, 2, 2, 14).<br>==Foot Notes==

श्रमण
<u>'''Śramaṇa'''</u> ‘mendicant monk,’ is first found in the Upaniṣads.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1497> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 3, 22;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 7, in ''IndischeStudien,'' 1, 78.</ref> According to Fick,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1497> ''Die sociale Gliederung,'' 39 ''et seq.''</ref> anyone could become a [[श्रमण|Śramaṇa]]. For the time of Megasthenes this seems indicated by his evidence, which, however, refers only to the east of India, beyond the '''[[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]]''' proper.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1497> Strabo, xv. 1, 49, 60;<br> Arrian ''Indica,'' xii. 8, 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 27, 28, 129, 138.</ref> The Vedic evidence is merely the name and the fact that '''[[तापस|Tāpasa]],''' ‘ascetic,’ follows it in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka. 

श्रवण
<u>'''Śravaṇa.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

श्रवण-दत्त
<u>'''Śravaṇa-datta'''</u> (‘given by '''[[श्रवण|Śravaṇa]]'''’) '''Kauhala''' (‘descendant of Kohala’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[सुशारद शालङ्कायन|Suśārada Śālaṅkāyana]]''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1499> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref>

श्रविष्ठ
<u>'''Śraviṣṭha.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

श्रायस
<u>'''Śrāyasa'''</u> is the patronymic of '''[[कण्व|Kaṇva]]''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_1501> v. 4, 7, 5.</ref> and the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1501> xxi. 8.</ref> where he appears as a teacher, and of '''[[वीतहव्य|Vītahavya]]''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx3_ve2_1501> v. 6, 5, 3.</ref> and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx4_ve2_1501> ix. 1, 9;<br> xxv. 16, 3.</ref>

श्री
<u>'''Śrī'''</u> is the regular word for ‘prosperity,’ found once in the '''Rigveda'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1502> viii. 2, 19, seems to have this sense.</ref> and often later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1502> Av. vi. 54, 1;<br> 73, 1;<br> ix. 5, 31;<br> x. 6, 26;<br> xi. 1, 12. 21;<br> xii. 1, 63;<br> 5, 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 8, 6;<br> v. 1, 8, 6;<br> vi. 1, 10, 3;<br> vii. 2, 7, 3, etc. Already in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xi. 4, 3) she is regarded as a goddess. See Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 217 ''et seq.'' She already appears in the earliest Buddhist sculptures seated on a lotus between two elephants that pour water over her. This type of the goddess has survived down to the present day in India.</ref> '''[[श्रेष्ठिन्|Śreṣṭhin]].'''

श्रुत-कक्ष
<u>'''Śruta-kakṣa'''</u> is mentioned once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1503> viii. 92, 25. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 108.</ref> as the [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] of a hymn, the authorship of which the Anukramaṇī (Index) ascribes to him. A Sāman or chant of his is mentioned in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_1503> ix. 2, 7 (''śrauta-[[कक्ष|kakṣa]]'').</ref>

श्रुत-रथ
<u>'''Śruta-ratha'''</u> is the name of a young king in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1504> i. 122, 7.</ref> He is also the patron of the '''[[पज्र|Pajra]]''' family, including '''[[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1504> Rv. v. 36, 6. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 155;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 97.</ref> 

श्रुतर्य
<u>'''Śrutarya'''</u> occurs once in the Rigveda (i. 112, 9) as the name of a protégé of the Aśvins.<br>==Foot Notes==

श्रुतर्वन् आर्क्ष
<u>'''Śrutarvan Ārkṣa'''</u> (‘descendant of Ṛkṣa’) is the name of a prince whose liberality is celebrated in one hymn of the Rigveda (viii. 74, 4. 13), and whose victory over '''[[मृगय|Mṛgaya]]''' is mentioned in another (x. 49, 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

श्रुतर्-विद्
<u>'''Śrutar-vid'''</u> is the name of a man in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1507> v. 44, 12. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 138, 139.</ref>

श्रुत-सेन
<u>'''Śruta-sena'''</u> is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 5, 4, 3) and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xvi. 9, 4) as one of the brothers of '''[[जनम्एजय|Janamejaya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

श्रुष वाह्नेय
<u>'''Śruṣa Vāhneya'''</u> (‘descendant of Vahni’) '''Kāśyapa''' (‘descendant of '''[[कश्यप|Kaśyapa]]'''’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''Devataras,''' in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 40, 1). It is much more likely that Śruṣa is a mere misreading for '''Śūṣa.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

श्रुष्टि-गु
<u>'''Śruṣṭi-gu'''</u> (‘possessing obedient oxen’) is the name of a man in a [[वालखिल्य|Vālakhilya]] hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1510> viii. 51, 1. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 140, 141;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 90.</ref>

श्रेणि
<u>'''Śreṇi'''</u> means a ‘row’ or ‘line’ of birds,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1511> Rv. v. 59, 7.</ref> or horses,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1511> Rv. i. 126, 4.</ref> or chariots,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1511> Rv. iv. 38, 6;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 14, 1.</ref> and so forth.

श्रेष्ठिन्
<u>'''Śreṣṭhin'''</u> occurs in several passages of the Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1512> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 30, 3;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxviii. 6;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 20. [[भग|Bhaga]] is the [[श्रेष्ठिन्|Śreṣṭhin]] of the gods, [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 4, 10.</ref> where the St. Petersburg Dictionary assigns to the word the sense of ‘a man of consequence.’ It is, however, possible that  the word may already have the sense of the ‘headman of a guild,’ the modern Seth.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1512> ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''India, Old and New,'' 168 ''et seq.''</ref> There is a similar doubt in the use of ''śraiṣṭhya,''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1512> Av. i. 9, 3 = [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 5, 4, 2 = [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, v. 6 = Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 4, 3. See also for the word, Av. x. 6, 31;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 25, 8;<br> vii. 18, 8;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 9, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 7, 1, 1;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 2, 6;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 6;<br> iv. 15, 20, etc. The use of ''śraiṣṭhya'' is, on the whole, not in favour of the theory that it is a technical term.</ref> which is perhaps not merely ‘the foremost place,’ as usually assumed, but definitely ‘the presidency of a guild.’<br><br>Guilds are referred to in the [[धर्म|Dharma]] Sūtras,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1512> [[गौतम|Gautama]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xi. 20, 21, etc.;<br> Foy, ''Die ko7nigliche Gewalt,'' 14, n. 2, etc.</ref> and they play a considerable part in the Buddhist texts<ref name=fx5_ve2_1512> Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 88 ''et seq.''</ref> and the Epic.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1512> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 81 ''et seq.''</ref> But the Vedic evidence is inadequate to afford ground for positive assertion or denial of their existence or organization in Vedic times.

श्रोत्रिय
<u>'''Śrotriya'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1513> ix. 6, 37;<br> x. 2, 20 ''et seq.''</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1513> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiii. 4;<br> xxviii. 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 25, 15;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 4, 5;<br> xiii. 4, 3. 14;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 8, etc. ''Cf. mahā-[[श्रोत्रिय|śrotriya]],'' ‘a great theologian,’ in Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 11, 1.</ref> denotes a ‘Brahmin learned in holy lore,’ ‘theologian.’

श्रौत-ऋषि
<u>'''Śrauta-ṛṣi'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1514> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 1, 6.</ref> or '''Śrautarṣi,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1514> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 4, 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 10, 9, 11.</ref> ‘descendant of Srutaṛṣi or Śrutarṣi,’ is the patronymic of '''[[देवभाग|Devabhāga]].'''

श्रौमत्य
<u>'''Śraumatya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Śrumant,’ is the name of a teacher in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (x. 4, 5, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

श्लेष्मन्
<u>'''Śleṣman'''</u> means generally that with which parts of a thing are joined together (from ''śliṣ,'' ‘join’): with reference to a hide,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1516> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 32, 6;<br> Jaiminīya Upanisad [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 17, 3;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 17, 4.</ref>  ‘laces’ of some sort may be intended; to a chariot,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1516> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 9. ''Cf.'' [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 1, 13, where a chariot ('''[[रथ|Ratha]]''') is called ''śleṣmavant,'' ‘tied with ropes.’</ref> ‘bonds’ or ‘cords’ are probably meant; and to wood,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1516> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 12. ''Cf.'' the Upaniṣads, cited in n. 1, and Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, ii. 1, which looks like a bad secondary version of the passage in the Jaiminīya.</ref> ‘glue’ is perhaps the sense.

श्लोक
<u>'''Śloka,'''</u> in the plural, is found enumerated after the '''Upaniṣads,''' and before the '''Sūtras,''' in the list of literary types given in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1517> ii. 4, 10;<br> iv. 1, 6 (Mādhyaṃdina = iv. 1, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> 5, 11.</ref> In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1517> iii. 10, 6.</ref> the [[श्लोक|Śloka]]-kṛt appears: he is rather the ‘poet,’ as Max Müller<ref name=fx3_ve2_1517> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 15, 69</ref> renders it, than merely one who ‘calls aloud,’ as the St. Petersburg Dictionary explains the term.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1517> In Av. v. 20, 7, the word has the sense assigned to it by the Dictionary.</ref> Exactly what is meant cannot be said: ‘verses’ generally may be intended, several kinds being preserved in the Brāhmaṇas and called Ślokas.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1517> ''E.g.,'' Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 3, 1, 5;<br> 5, 4, 12;<br> xiii. 7, 1, 15;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 22, 3: [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, ii. 3, 8;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxiv. 18, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, viii. 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 6, etc.</ref>

श्लोण्य
<u>'''Śloṇya'''</u> in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1518> iii. 9, 17, 2. ''Cf. śloṇa,'' ‘lame,’ Av. xii. 4, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 6, 7, etc.</ref> denotes ‘lameness,’ not ‘skin disease’ (''tvag-doṣa''), as explained by the commentator.

श्व-घ्निन्
<u>'''Śva-ghnin'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1519> i. 92, 10;<br> ii. 12, 4;<br> iv. 20, 3;<br> viii. 45, 38.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1519> iv. 16, 5.</ref> clearly means a ‘gamester’ or ‘professional gambler.’ It may originally have denoted a ‘hunter.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_1519> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 71.</ref>

श्वन्
<u>'''Śvan'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1520> i. 161, 13 (where the sense is quite obscure);<br> 182, 4;<br> ii. 39, 4, etc.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1520> Av. vi. 37, 3;<br> xi. 2, 2;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 8, 22, etc.</ref> is the word for ‘dog,’ the feminine being Śunī.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1520> Av. iv. 20, 7 (''catur-akṣī'');<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 5, 2, 10.</ref> The dog was a tame animal,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1520> Rv. ii. 39, 4.</ref> and used  to guard the house from thieves or other intruders.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1520> Rv. vii. 55, 5.</ref> He was also employed in hunting the boar (''[[वराह|varāha]]-yu''),<ref name=fx6_ve2_1520> Rv. x. 86, 4.</ref> but was no match for the lion.<ref name=fx7_ve2_1520> Av. iv. 36, 6.</ref> A hundred dogs are mentioned as a gift in a Dānastuti (‘Praise of Gifts’) in a [[वालखिल्य|Vālakhilya]] hymn.<ref name=fx8_ve2_1520> Rv. viii. 55, 3.</ref> Elsewhere the dog is regarded as unfit for sacrifice, as being unclean,<ref name=fx9_ve2_1520> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 51, 4;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 4, 1, 4.</ref> and is driven away from the sacrifice.<ref name=fx10_ve2_1520> Rv. ix. 101, 1.</ref> To eat dog's flesh was a last resort of despair and hunger.<ref name=fx11_ve2_1520> Rv. iv. 18, 3. Later, ''śva-paca'' (‘dog-cooking’) denotes a degraded caste.</ref> The bones of the feast were given to the dog.<ref name=fx12_ve2_1520> Av. vi. 37, 3. ''Cf.'' ix. 4, 16.</ref> Saramā figures in legend as Indra's faithful dog<ref name=fx13_ve2_1520> i. 62, 3;<br> 72, 8, etc. See Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 151.</ref> searching for the cows. Rudra is lord of dogs (''śva-pati'') in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]];<ref name=fx14_ve2_1520> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 28;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 13;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 5.</ref> the ‘dog-keeper’ (''śvanin'') is mentioned in the list of sacrificial victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the same Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx15_ve2_1520> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 27;<br> xxx. 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 3, 1, etc. ''Cf. śva-nī'' (‘dog-leader’), Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 5.</ref> The four-eyed (''catur-[[अक्ष|akṣa]]'') dogs of certain texts<ref name=fx16_ve2_1520> ''Cf.'' Rv. x. 14, 10. 11;<br> Av. xviii. 2, 11. 12: [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, vi. 3, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 8, 4, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 1, 2, 9, etc.</ref> are, of course, mythological.<ref name=fx17_ve2_1520> Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 165 ''et seq.;<br> Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 500, thinks that Yama's two dogs are the sun and the moon (''cf.'' '''[[दिव्य श्वन्|Divya Śvan]]''').<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 233: Hopkins, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 15, 154-163.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[कुर्कुर|Kurkura]].'''

स्व-पद्
<u>'''Sva-pad'''</u> denotes a ‘savage animal,’ ‘beast of prey,’ in the Atharvaveda (viii. 5, 11; xix. 39, 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

श्वयथ
<u>'''Śvayatha'''</u> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1522> iv. 2, 1, 11 (of the eye, in a myth).</ref> means ‘swelling.’ Possibly ''śīyathu,'' the disease prevalent in '''[[विदेह|Videha]]''' according to the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta Sutra,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1522> ii. 5: Caland, ''Über das rituelle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 35, 36.</ref> was a kind of ‘swelling’ (? goitre). 

श्व-वर्त
<u>'''Śva-varta,'''</u> ‘found in dogs,’ is, according to some manuscripts, the name of a species of worm in the Atharvaveda (ix. 4, 16). See '''[[शवर्त|Śavarta]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

श्वशुर
<u>'''Śvaśura'''</u> from the Rigveda onwards<ref name=fx1_ve2_1524> x. 28, 1;<br> 85, 46;<br> 95, 4;<br> Av. viii. 6, 24;<br> xiv. 2, 26, etc.</ref> denotes the ‘father-inlaw’ of the wife; not till the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] period does it include the ‘father-in-law’ of the husband.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1524> Pāraskara [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 10, 46.</ref> The daughter-in-law ('''[[स्नुषा|Snuṣā]]'''), in the normal case when the father-in-law was the head of the family to which her husband belonged in fact as well as in age, was bound to pay him all respect.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1524> See Rv. x. 95, 4;<br> Av. viii. 6, 24;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 12 (''Indische Studien,'' 5, 260);<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 22, 7. So in Av. xiv. 2, 26, the daughter-in-law is to be ‘helpful’ to the father-in-law.</ref> When the old man had ceased to exercise control, she became mistress (''samrājñī'') over him and his wife.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1524> Rv. x. 85, 46. See Pati.</ref> In the plural<ref name=fx5_ve2_1524> Rv. x. 95, 12;<br> Av. xiv. 2, 27;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.'' Or it may be a plural ''majestatis,'' but not a sign of polyandry.<br><br>''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 515, 516.</ref> the word denotes the ‘parents-in-law.’

श्वश्रू
<u>'''Śvaśrū'''</u> denotes ‘mother-in-law’ of the husband<ref name=fx1_ve2_1525> Rv. x. 85, 46;<br> Av. xiv. 2, 26.</ref> as well as of the wife.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1525> Rv. x. 34, 3.</ref> She, together with her husband, if he became unable to manage the family,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1525> Rv. x. 85, 46.</ref> fell under the daughter-in-law's sway, but otherwise was entitled to regard.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1525> Av. xiv. 2, 26.</ref> The gambler in the Rigveda<ref name=fx5_ve2_1525> Rv. x. 34, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Vermandtschaftsnamen,'' 516.</ref> complains of his having lost the favour of his wife's mother as one of the misfortunes brought upon him by dicing.

श्वाजनि
<u>'''Śvājani'''</u> is the name of a [[वैश्य|Vaiśya]] in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 5, 2). <br>==Foot Notes==

श्वापद
<u>'''Śvāpada,'''</u> like '''Śvapad,''' denotes a ‘savage animal’ or ‘beast of prey.’ It is mentioned in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1527> x. 16, 6.</ref> in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1527> xi. 10, 8.</ref> and occasionally later.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1527> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 4, 10 (where the tiger, '''[[शार्दूल|Śārdūla]],''' is mentioned as the chief of them);<br> xii. 2, 4, 16;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 4, 29;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xii. 16, etc.</ref>

श्वा-विध्
<u>'''Śvā-vidh'''</u> (‘dog-piercing’) is the name of the ‘porcupine’ in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1528> v. 13, 9.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1528> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 20, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 14;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 56;<br> xxiv. 33, etc.</ref> It is called ‘long-eared’ (''karṇa'').<ref name=fx3_ve2_1528> Av., ''loc. cit.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 82.</ref> See also '''[[शल्यक|Śalyaka]].'''

श्विक्न
<u>'''Śvikna'''</u> is the name of a people twice mentioned in the Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1529> xii. 8, 3, 7;<br> xiii. 5, 4, 15. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 209, 210.</ref> in connexion with their king, '''[[ऋषभ|Ṛṣabha]] [[याज्ञतुर|Yājñatura]].''' ''Cf.'' '''[[श्वैक्न|Śvaikna]].'''

श्वित्र
<u>'''1. Śvitra'''</u> (‘white’) is the name of a species of serpent in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1530> iii. 27, 6 (where there is a variant ''[[चित्र|citra]]'');<br> x. 4, 5, 13.</ref> and the later Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1530> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 10, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 13, 21, has in the parallel passage ''[[चित्र|citra]],'' probably by error.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 95;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 134. Perhaps [[श्वित्र|Śvitra]], in the lis of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 39, has this sense;<br> but the St. Petersburg Dictionary explains it as ‘a certain domestic animal,’ or, generally ‘a white animal.’</ref>

श्वित्र
<u>'''2. Śvitra'''</u> is found as an adjective in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xii. 11, 11) in the sense of ‘afflicted with white leprosy.’<br>==Foot Notes==

श्वित्र्य
<u>'''Śvitrya.'''</u> See '''[[श्वैत्रेय|Śvaitreya]].''' <br>==Foot Notes==

श्वेत-केतु
<u>'''Śveta-ketu'''</u> Aruṇeya<ref name=fx1_ve2_1533> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 2, 7, 12;<br> 5, 4, 18;<br> 6, 2, 1;<br> xii. 2, 1, 9;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 7, 1;<br> vi. 1, 1 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 2, 1 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 3, 1;<br> vi. 1, 1;<br> 8, 1.</ref> (‘descendant of '''Aruṇa'''’) or '''[[औद्दालकि|Auddālaki]]'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1533> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 3, 13;<br> iv. 2, 5, 14.</ref> (‘son of '''Uddālaka'''’) is mentioned repeatedly in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] and the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]. In the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_1533> i. 1.</ref> he appears as [[श्वेतकेतु|Śvetaketu]], son of '''[[आरुणि|Āruṇi]],''' and as a '''[[गौतम|Gautama]].''' In the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_1533> xxvi. 4.</ref> he is quoted as an authority on the vexed question of the duty of the '''[[सदस्य|Sadasya]],''' or the seventeenth priest, at the ritual of the Kauṣītakins, to notify errors in the sacrifice; [[आरुणि|Āruṇi]], his father, is also cited. He was a person of some originality, for he insisted on eating honey despite the general prohibition of the use of that delicacy by Brahmacārins or religious students.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1533> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 4, 18.</ref> He was a contemporary of, and was instructed by the '''[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]]''' king '''Pravāhaṇa [[जैवल|Jaivala]].'''<ref name=fx6_ve2_1533> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 1 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 2, 1 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 3, 1.</ref> He was also a contemporary of '''[[जनक|Janaka]],''' of '''[[विदेह|Videha]],''' and figured among the Brahmin disputants at his court.<ref name=fx7_ve2_1533> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 6, 2, 1 (it is to be noted that he came upon [[जनक|Janaka]] when travelling about with some other Brahmins: he was never settled in the [[विदेह|Videha]] country, but was clearly a '''Kuru-[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]],''' like his father);<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 7, 1, where he shares the usual fate of defeat in argument by [[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]].</ref> A story is told of him in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]:<ref name=fx8_ve2_1533> xvi. 27, 6 ''et seq.'' The exact sense of ''kṛtsnake brahmabandhau vyajijñāsiṣi'' is not quite certain. But [[आरुणि|Āruṇi]] seems to assert the love of knowledge, not of material advantages accruing to the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]], to have been his concern in life.</ref> '''[[जल जातूकर्ण्य|Jala Jātūkarṇya]]''' was lucky enough to become the [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of three peoples or kings, of '''[[काशि|Kāśi]], [[कोसल|Kosala]],''' and '''[[विदेह|Videha]].''' Seeing this, [[श्वेतकेतु|Śvetaketu]] felt annoyed and reproached his father with his excessive devotion to sacrifice, which merely enriched and glorified others, not himself. His father replied, forbidding him to speak thus: he had learned the true method of sacrificing, and his ambition in life had been to discuss it with every Brahmin.<br><br>All the references to [[श्वेतकेतु|Śvetaketu]] belong to the latest period of Vedic literature. It is, therefore, not surprising that the Āpastamba [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx9_ve2_1533> i. 2, 5, 4-6.</ref> should refer to him as an Avara, or  person of later days, who still became a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] by special merit. His date, however, must not be fixed too low, because the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] in which he plays so marked a part is certainly earlier than Pāṇini, and was apparently even in that grammarian's time believed to be an ancient work: hence 500 B.C. is probably rather too late than too early a period for [[श्वेतकेतु|Śvetaketu]] as a rough approximation to a date.<ref name=fx10_ve2_1533> See on this, Bühler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 2, xxxvii ''et seq.;<br>'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xxxv ''et seq.;<br>'' Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 360 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 65;<br> 13, 443;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 22 ''et seq.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 433;<br> Max Müller, ''Ancient Sanskrit Literature,'' 421 ''et seq.;<br>'' Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 397, n.</ref>

श्वेत्या
<u>'''Śvetyā'''</u> appears in the [[नदी|Nadī]]-[[स्तुति|stuti]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1534> x. 75, 6.</ref> (‘praise of rivers’) to be a stream, probably a tributary of the Indus.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1534> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 14, 15;<br> udwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 200, gives the form as Śvetī;<br> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 184, gives both forms.</ref>

श्वैक्न
<u>'''Śvaikna,'''</u> ‘king of the '''Śviknas,'''’ is the title of '''Pratīdarśa,''' who was, according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1535> ii. 4, 4, 3.</ref> one of those who offered the [[दाक्षायण|Dākṣāyaṇa]] sacrifice. He also taught '''[[सुप्लन् सार्ञ्जय|Suplan Sārñjaya]]''' the sacrifice: hence Weber<ref name=fx2_ve2_1535> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 209, 210.</ref> has inferred a connexion of the Śviknas and the '''Sṛñjayas.'''

श्वैत्रेय
<u>'''Śvaitreya'''</u> occurs in two passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1536> i. 33, 14;<br> v. 19, 3.</ref> where Sāyaṇa sees in the word the name of a man, a ‘descendant of Śvitrā.’ The first passage is almost identical with one in the sixth Maṇḍala of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1536> vi. 26, 4.</ref> where, however, '''[[दशद्यु|Daśadyu]]''' appears alone without [[श्वैत्रेय|Śvaitreya]]. Ludwig<ref name=fx3_ve2_1536> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 147.</ref> identifies [[दशद्यु|Daśadyu]] with [[श्वैत्रेय|Śvaitreya]] (‘son of Śvitrī’), and considers him a son of '''[[कुत्स|Kutsa]].'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_1536> ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 51, 6;<br> vi. 26, 3, 4.</ref> Bergaigne<ref name=fx5_ve2_1536> ''Religion Védique,'' 3, 11.</ref> and Baunack<ref name=fx6_ve2_1536> Kuhn's ''Zeitschrift,'' 35, 527.</ref> think he is really '''[[भुज्यु|Bhujyu]].''' Geldner<ref name=fx7_ve2_1536> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 7, 8.</ref> considers that he was a bull used for fighting, the son  of a Śvitrā cow,<ref name=fx8_ve2_1536> ''Cf. śvaitarī,'' Rv. iv. 33, 1.</ref> but this is very doubtful, though the term ''[[श्वैत्रेय|śvaitreya]]'' is elsewhere applied to a bull.<ref name=fx9_ve2_1536> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1910, 935.</ref> [[श्वित्र्य|Śvitrya]]<ref name=fx10_ve2_1536> Rv. i. 33, 15, where Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' takes ''śvitryam'' as the accusative of ''śvitrī.''</ref> seems to have the same sense as [[श्वैत्रेय|Śvaitreya]].

षण्ड
<u>'''Ṣaṇḍa'''</u> is the name of a priest at the snake festival described in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1537> xxv. 15, 3. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 35.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[कुषण्ड|Kuṣaṇḍa]].'''

षण्डिक
<u>'''Ṣaṇḍika'''</u> is mentioned in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_1538> i. 4, 12, where von Schroeder gives no variant. But ''ṣ'' and ''kh'' are constantly interchanged in manuscripts.</ref> as a contemporary of '''[[केशिन्|Keśin]].''' Probably '''Khaṇḍika''' should be read as usual elsewhere.

सं-रुध्
<u>'''Saṃ-rudh'''</u> and '''Saṃ-likhita''' occur in the Atharvaveda (vii. 50, 5) as two technical terms, of unknown sense, used in dicing.<br>==Foot Notes==

सं-वत्सर
<u>'''Saṃ-vatsara,'''</u> ‘year,’ is repeatedly mentioned from the Rigveda onwards.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1540> Rv. i. 110, 4;<br> 140, 2;<br> 161, 13;<br> vii. 103, 1, 7, etc.;<br> Av. i. 35, 4;<br> ii. 6, 1;<br> iii. 10, 2;<br> iv. 35, 4;<br> vi. 53, 3, etc.</ref><br><br>It duration was, according to the concurrent evidence of the Saṃhitās and Brāhmaṇas, 360 days, divided into 12 months, being, no doubt, roughly a lunar synodic year, which, however, it exceeded in length by 6 days.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1540> See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''</ref> As a solar year it appears only in the [[निदान|Nidāna]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_1540> v. 12, 2. 5. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 284.</ref> of the [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]], where the sun is stated to spend 13(1/3) days in each of the 27 Nakṣatras. <br><br>The year being obviously out of harmony with the solar year (whether sidereal or tropical), efforts were certainly made to effect an assimilation of the natural and the accepted year. As has been seen (see '''[[मास|Māsa]]'''), the evidence goes strongly to show that the intercalation was not an easy matter in the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] period, though there are traces of what may be regarded as a five-yearly or six-yearly intercalation. But there is no conclusive evidence that these periods were really observed.<br><br>Zimmer,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1540> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 369, 370, and ''cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. [[संवत्सर|saṃvatsara]],'' 2.</ref> indeed, considers that the evidence required is afforded by the lists of the years, which are sometimes enumerated as five: [[संवत्सर|Saṃvatsara]], [[परिवत्सर|Parivatsara]], Idāvatsara, Idvatsara, and Vatsara;<ref name=fx5_ve2_1540> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxvii. 45.</ref> or [[संवत्सर|Saṃvatsara]], [[परिवत्सर|Parivatsara]], Idāvatsara, Iduvatsara, Vatsara;<ref name=fx6_ve2_1540> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 7, 3, 4.</ref> or [[संवत्सर|Saṃvatsara]], Idāvatsara, Iduvatsara, Idvatsara, Vatsara;<ref name=fx7_ve2_1540> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 10, 4, 1.</ref> or [[संवत्सर|Saṃvatsara]], [[परिवत्सर|Parivatsara]], Idāvatsara, Anuvatsara, Udvatsara;<ref name=fx8_ve2_1540> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiii. 15;<br> xxxix. 6;<br> xl. 6.</ref> or [[संवत्सर|Saṃvatsara]], [[परिवत्सर|Parivatsara]], Idāvatsara, Anuvatsara, Idvatsara.<ref name=fx9_ve2_1540> [[गर्ग|Garga]], quoted in the commentary on [[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]], 10.</ref> But it must be noted not merely that the names vary considerably, but that four only are mentioned in some places,<ref name=fx10_ve2_1540> Saṃ-, Pari-, Idā-, Anu-vatsara, [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 13, 17;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 10, 1.</ref> in others<ref name=fx11_ve2_1540> Idā-, Pari-, [[सं-वत्सर|Saṃ-vatsara]], Av. vi. 55, 3;<br> Idu-, Pari-, [[सं-वत्सर|Saṃ-vatsara]], [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 7, 2, 4.</ref> three, in others<ref name=fx12_ve2_1540> Saṃ-, [[परि-वत्सर|Pari-vatsara]], Av. viii. 8, 23;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, x. 80.</ref> two, and in yet others<ref name=fx13_ve2_1540> Saṃ-, Pari-, Idā-, Anu-, Vatsara, [[सं-वत्सर|Saṃ-vatsara]], Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 15;<br> Saṃ-, Pari-, Idā-, Idu-, Id-, Vatsara, [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iv. 19, 1. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 298, n. 1;<br> Max Müller, ''Rigveda,'' 4^3, xxv, n. 1.</ref> six. Moreover, in none of these enumerations is there any reference to the names being connected with a system of intercalation. It is most probable that here we have no more that a mere series of priestly variations of Vatsara, based on the older and more genuine [[संवत्सर|Saṃvatsara]] and [[परिवत्सर|Parivatsara]] as variants of the simple Vatsara, ‘year.’ The key to the invention of the series is probably to be found in passages like that of the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx14_ve2_1540> xvii. 13, 17.</ref> where the several '''[[चातुर्मास्य|Cāturmāsya]]''' (‘four-monthly’) sacrifices are equated  with the different years.<ref name=fx15_ve2_1540> ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 91;<br> Thibaut, ''Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik,'' 12;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 24, 42.</ref> Particularly unjustifiable is the attempt of Zimmer to see in the two-year series a series of two years of 354 days each, with an intercalary month in the second; for the year of 354 days, as such, is not known to have existed before the [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] period.<br><br>Zimmer<ref name=fx16_ve2_1540> ''Op. cit.,'' 366, 367;<br> Tilak, ''Orion,'' 16 ''et seq.;<br>'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 145.</ref> also finds an attempt at intercalation in the famous 12 days in which the Ṛbhus are said to have slept in the house of Agohya.<ref name=fx17_ve2_1540> Rv. iv. 33, 7. ''Cf.'' i. 110, 2;<br> 161, 13. See on this legend, Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 133;<br> Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 236.</ref> He thinks that they represent twelve days added at the winter solstice to equate the lunar year of 354 days and the solar year of 366 days; and from the reverence paid in German antiquity to the ‘12 nights,’ he infers that this mode of intercalation is Indo-Germanic.<ref name=fx18_ve2_1540> See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 242 ''et seq.;<br>'' 17, 223, 224;<br> 18, 45, 46;<br> ''Proceedings of the Berlin Academy,'' 1894, 809;<br> Thibaut, ''op. cit.,'' 10;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 308, 310;<br> Whitney, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, xciv.</ref> There can be little doubt that this view is wrong, and that the 12 days are merely the ‘reflexion of the year’ (''saṃvatsarasya pratimā'')<ref name=fx19_ve2_1540> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, vii. 15;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 9, 10;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 15. See also Atharvaveda, iv. 11, 11;<br> Weber, ''Omina und Portenta,'' 388.</ref> in the sense that they represent the twelve months, and have no relation to chronology at all.<br><br>A reference to the use of [[संवत्सर|Saṃvatsara]] alone as the fifth year of the cycle is seen by Shamasastry<ref name=fx20_ve2_1540> ''Gavām Ayana,'' 137, 138.</ref> in the peculiar dating of certain notices in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx21_ve2_1540> ii. 12;<br> iii. 1;<br> xxvi. 18;<br> xxx. 3. See also [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 1, 1, 7.</ref> but this view is improbable.<ref name=fx22_ve2_1540> Caland, ''Über das rituelle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des Bandhāyana,'' 36, 37, gives a much more reasonable explanation of the anomaly.</ref>

संवरण
<u>'''Saṃvaraṇa'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] mentioned in one passage of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1541> v. 33, 10. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 215.</ref> 

संवर्ग-जित् लामकायन
<u>'''Saṃvarga-jit Lāmakāyana'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''Śākadāsa''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1542> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373.</ref>

सं-वर्त
<u>'''1. Saṃ-varta'''</u> occurs once in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1543> viii. 54, 2. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 141, 164.</ref> with '''[[कृश|Kṛśa]]''' as an ancient sacrificer. He may be identical with the next.

सं-वर्त आङ्गिरस
<u>'''2. Saṃ-[[वर्त|varta]] Āṅgirasa'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[अङ्गिरस्|Aṅgiras]]'''’) is said in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1544> viii. 21, 12. ''Cf.'' Leumann, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 67 ''et seq.''</ref> to have consecrated '''Marutta.'''

सं-श्रवस् सौवर्चनस
<u>'''Saṃ-śravas Sauvarcanasa'''</u> is the name of a teacher who, according to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (i. 7, 2, 1), discussed a point of ritual with '''Tumiñja.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सं-श्रावयितृ
<u>'''Saṃ-śrāvayitṛ'''</u> in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (ii. 1) denotes the attendant who announces visitors, the ‘doorkeeper.’<br>==Foot Notes==

सं-श्लिष्टका
<u>'''Saṃ-śliṣṭakā'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1547> Śāṭyāyanaka in Sāyaṇa on Rv. viii. 91.</ref> or '''Saṃśviṣṭikā'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1547> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 221 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 29).</ref> is the name of an animal mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] and the Śāṭyāyanaka along with the '''[[गोधा|Godhā]].'''

सं-सर्प
<u>'''Saṃ-sarpa.'''</u> See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सं-स्कन्ध
<u>'''Saṃ-skandha'''</u> (‘having the shoulders together’) is the name of a disease mentioned with '''[[विष्कन्ध|Viṣkandha]]''' in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1549> xix. 34, 5, with Sāyaṇa's note.</ref> Whitney,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1549> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 952.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 65, 391;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 283.</ref> however, thinks it is intended as an adjective implying the sense of ‘counteracting the disease [[विष्कन्ध|Viṣkandha]].’ 

सं-होत्र
<u>'''Saṃ-hotra'''</u> occurs once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1550> x. 86, 10.</ref> where Geldner<ref name=fx2_ve2_1550> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 38.</ref> thinks the sense of ‘school,’ referring to a school of pupils of the ritual, is most appropriate.

सक्तु
<u>'''Saktu'''</u> in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_1551> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 4, 10, 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 21 ''et seq.;<br>'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 16;<br> ix. 1, 1, 8 (''cf.'' '''Gavedhukā'''), etc.;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 2 (''cf.'' '''[[अपामार्ग|Apāmārga]]'''). ''Cf.'' '''[[कुवल|Kuvala]], [[कर्कन्धु|Karkandhu]], [[बदर|Badara]]:''' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 4, 22, etc.</ref> denotes ‘coarsely ground meal,’ ‘groats,’ especially ‘barley meal.’ In the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1551> x. 71, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 238.</ref> where the word occurs only once, it seems rather to mean grain before it is winnowed by the '''[[तितü|Titaü]].''' If the latter word, however, designates a ‘sieve,’ [[सक्तु|Saktu]] might still mean ‘groats,’ as opposed to fine meal.

सखि
<u>'''Sakhi,'''</u> ‘friend,’ is common from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1552> i. 164, 20 (of birds);<br> iii. 43, 4 (of steeds);<br> ii. 1, 9;<br> v. 12, 5;<br> vi. 75, 3, etc.</ref> onwards,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1552> Av. v. 4, 7;<br> 11, 9;<br> 13, 5, etc. So ''sakhitva'' and ''sakhya,'' ‘friendship,’ are also common--''e.g.,'' Rv. i. 10, 6;<br> iii. 1, 15;<br> iv. 25, 2, etc., and Rv. 1. 178, 2;<br> ii. 18, 8;<br> vii. 22, 9, etc.</ref> both literally and metaphorically.

सघन्
<u>'''Saghan'''</u> is the name of a bird, perhaps ‘eagle’ or ‘vulture,’ in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_1553> iii. 2, 1, 1.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_1553> ii. 8, 6, 1;<br> Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.'' (‘valture’), ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 88.</ref>

सङ्ग प्रयोगि
<u>'''Saṅga Prayogi'''</u> seems to be mentioned as a teacher in the Maitrāyaṇi Saṃhitā (iii. 1, 9).<br>==Foot Notes==

सं-गति
<u>'''Saṃ-gati'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda (x. 141, 4) seems to have the sense of '''[[सम्इति|Samiti]],''' ‘assembly of the people.’ <br>==Foot Notes==

सं-गव
<u>'''Saṃ-gava'''</u> denotes the time when the grazing cows are driven together for milking. In the division of the day the word denotes the period before midday, ‘forenoon.’ It is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1556> v. 76, 3.</ref> and often later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1556> Av. ix. 6, 46;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 9, 2;<br> 5, 3, 1;<br> ii. 1, 1, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 3, 9;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 9, 4;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 12, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 112 ''et seq.''</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Go''' and '''Ahan.'''

सं-गविनी
<u>'''Saṃ-gavinī'''</u> is found in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1557> iii. 18, 14. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 3, 112, 113;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 362.</ref> where it is said that the animals of the '''Bharatas''' in the evening were at the '''[[गोष्ठ|Goṣṭha]],''' ‘pasture,’ but at midday came to the [[संगविनी|Saṃgavinī]], apparently a shed or an enclosure in which during the heat of the day they were milked.

सं-ग्रहीतृ
<u>'''Saṃ-grahītṛ'''</u> is found in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_1558> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 9, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 5;<br> iv. 3, 8 (as a [[रत्निन्|Ratnin]]) in the [[शतरुद्रिय|Śatarudriya]] in the plural [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 4, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 13;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 26.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1558> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 3, 5;<br> 9, 6;<br> iii. 8, 5, 3;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii, 25, 6. Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 1, 8;<br> 4, 3, 23.</ref> He is an official who figures among the '''Ratnins''' of the king. The sense of ‘charioteer’ seems adequate for every passage, but Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx3_ve2_1558> on [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 9, 2, and optionally on i. 8, 16;<br> but as charioteer on i. 8, 15;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 10, 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 63, n. 1.</ref> in some passages inclines to think that the meaning is ‘treasurer’ of the king.

सं-ग्राम
<u>'''Saṃ-grāma'''</u> denotes primarily, it seems, ‘assembly’ either in peace<ref name=fx1_ve2_1559> Av. xii. 1, 56, where it is joined with '''[[सम्इति|Samiti]].''' We might see in this passage, and that cited in n. 2, the technical name of the village assembly as opposed to the larger assemblies of the people, but there is no good warrant for so doing.</ref> or in war,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1559> Av. iv. 24, 7, where ''saṃgrāmān'' is read;<br> but the parallel passages ([[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 7, 15, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 16, 5) have ''saṃgrāmani.''</ref> when it means an ‘armed band.’ Its normal sense in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_1559> v. 21, 7;<br> xi. 9, 26.</ref> and later<ref name=fx4_ve2_1559> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Samhitā, ii. 1, 3, 1;<br> 8, 4, etc.</ref> is ‘war,’ ‘battle.’ <br><br>Little is known of Vedic warfare, but it seems to have been simple. A body of foot soldiers with charioteers composed every army, the two going together,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1559> Rv. ii. 12, 8.</ref> and the foot soldiers being often overthrown by the charioteers,<ref name=fx6_ve2_1559> Av. vii. 62, 1. ''Cf.'' '''[[मुष्टिहन्|Muṣṭihan]]'''</ref> who were doubtless the Kṣatriyas and their foremost retainers. Probably the foot soldiers bore little armour, and used only the bow for offence, as is suggested by the account that Herodotus gives of the Indian contingent of the army with which Xerxes invaded Greece.<ref name=fx7_ve2_1559> Herodotus, vii. 65.</ref> The nobles, on the other hand, may have had cuirass ('''[[वर्मन्|Varman]]'''), helmet ('''[[शिप्रा|Śiprā]]'''), and hand-guard ('''[[हस्तघ्न|Hastaghna]]''') as a protection from the friction of the bowstring. On the car was the charioteer, and on his left the warrior ('''[[सारथि|Sārathi]], [[सव्यष्ठा|Savyaṣṭhā]]'''). Riding is never mentioned in war,<ref name=fx8_ve2_1559> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 296, where he admits riding to be mentioned elsewhere;<br> Whitney, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 3, 312.</ref> and would hardly have been suited to Vedic ideas, for the warrior mainly depended on his bow, which he could not have used effectively from horseback. The offensive weapon ('''[[आयुध|Āyudha]]''') was practically the bow; spear and sword and axe were very seldom used.<br><br>Whether there was a strict tribal organization of the host, such as is once alluded to in the Homeric poems,<ref name=fx9_ve2_1559> ''Ibid,'' ii. 362.</ref> and is also recognized in Germany by Tacitus,<ref name=fx10_ve2_1559> ''Germania,'' 7.</ref> is uncertain (''cf.'' '''[[व्रात|Vrāta]]'''), but in the Epic relations ('''[[ज्ञाति|Jñāti]]''') fight together,<ref name=fx11_ve2_1559> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 193.</ref> and this rule, no doubt, applied more or less in Vedic times also.<br><br>Cities were besieged and invested (''upa-sad, pra-bhid''),<ref name=fx12_ve2_1559> ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 3, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 4, 3-5;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 23, 2, etc.;<br> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 2, 7;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 300, n.</ref> probably as a rule by blockade, since the ineffective means of assault of the time would have rendered storming difficult and expensive. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx13_ve2_1559> ''Op. cit.'' 3, 289, n.</ref> thinks that the ''pur cariṣṇū'' of the Rigveda<ref name=fx14_ve2_1559> viii. 1, 2-8, where it is attributed to the demon Śuṣṇa.</ref> was a kind of chariot; it may--like the Trojan horse--have been an Indian anticipation of the Roman means of assaulting a town.<br><br>Besides ordinary wars of defence and conquest, raids into  neighbouring territory seem to have been frequent and normal,<ref name=fx15_ve2_1559> ''Cf.'' Rv. x. 142, 4, as interpreted by Sāyaṇa and by Hillebrandt, ''op. cit.,'' 2, 64, n. 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 4, 1 (of the model Kuru kings).</ref> no doubt because of the booty ('''[[उद्आज|Udāja]], Nirāja''') which was to be won, and which the king had to share with the people.<br><br>Banners ('''[[ध्वज|Dhvaja]]''') were borne in war, and musical instruments ('''[[दुन्दुभि|Dundubhi]], [[बकुर|Bakura]]''')<ref name=fx16_ve2_1559> So, later, Arrian, ''Indica,'' vii. 9. The shouts of either side are shown in the word ''krandas'' (Rv. ii. 12, 8;<br> ''cf.'' vi. 25, 6;<br> x. 121, 6), which came to mean the ‘shouting host.’ ''Cf.'' also Tacitus, ''Germania,'' 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 469472;<br> Weber, Proceedings of the Berlin Academy, 1898, 564;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 293-301. See also '''[[इषु|Iṣu]], [[धन्वन्|Dhanvan]], [[रथ|Ratha]].''' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 281 ''et seq.,'' gives a full account of the later Epic armour and warfare. See also his note, ''ibid.,'' 15, 265, 266. For sacrifice in battle, ''cf.'' '''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]].'''</ref> were used by the combatants.

सं-घात
<u>'''Saṃ-ghāta'''</u> seems in a few passages<ref name=fx1_ve2_1560> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxix. 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, i. 16;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 4, 18.</ref> to have the sense of ‘battle.’

सचिव
<u>'''Saciva'''</u> ‘companion,’ ‘attendant’ (from ''sac,'' ‘follow’), later a common word for the comrade of a king, his minister, is found in Vedic literature in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 20, 1), where it is used by Indra of the Maruts. It seems to correspond in sense to the German ''comes'' or the English ''gesith.''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1561> Stubbs, ''Select Charters,'' 57.</ref>

स-जात
<u>'''Sa-jāta'''</u> (‘born together’) is found once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1562> i. 109, 1.</ref> and very often later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1562> Av. i. 9, 3;<br> 19, 3;<br> ii. 6, 4;<br> iii. 3, 6;<br> vi. 5, 2;<br> 73, 1;<br> xi. 1, 6, 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 3, 2;<br> 2, 1, 2;<br> 6, 9, 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 8;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 12, 13;<br> xii. 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, v. 23;<br> x. 29;<br> xxvii. 5, and often in the Brāhmaṇas.</ref> The word must clearly mean a ‘relative,’ and then more widely a man of the same position or rank, but the senses cannot be distinguished, so much do they merge into each other. The Sajātas of a king are of course princes;<ref name=fx3_ve2_1562> Av. iii. 3, 4. 6;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 188.</ref> of an  ordinary man, Vaiśyas;<ref name=fx4_ve2_1562> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 4, 19 (the Sajātas of a '''Grāmaṇī''').</ref> of a military man, Kṣatriyas. But there is no clear reference to caste as in the later Sajāti<ref name=fx5_ve2_1562> Manu, ix. 87;<br> x. 41, etc. The abstract ''sajātya'' (‘kinship’) is found in Rv. ii. 1, 5;<br> iii. 54, 16;<br> viii. 18, 19;<br> 20, 21;<br> 27, 10;<br> x. 64, 13;<br> but even it has no definite caste reference.</ref> (‘man of the same caste’). The disputes of Sajātas were notorious.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1562> ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7, 12, 2.</ref>

सं-चर
<u>'''Saṃ-cara'''</u> in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_1563> v. 4, 3, 5.</ref> has the sense of the ‘path’ of animals. Normally it is the term designating the ‘passage’ or ‘space’ on the sacrificial ground used or occupied by the several persons taking part in the rite.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1563> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 9, 2, 4;<br> iii. 1, 3, 28;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 7, 11;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 3, 42, etc.</ref>

सं-ज्ञान
<u>'''Saṃ-jñāna,'''</u> ‘concord,’ ‘harmony,’ is mentioned from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1564> x. 19, 6.</ref> onwards<ref name=fx2_ve2_1564> Av. iii. 30, 4;<br> vii. 52, 1;<br> xi. 1, 26, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 3, 2;<br> 3, 1, 14;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxvi. 1;<br> xxx. 9;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iv. 21, etc.</ref> as a matter of great consequence; the Atharvaveda contains many spells to bring it about. The lack of peace in the Vedic village was almost inevitable in view of its small size and the economic interdependence of its inhabitants. ''Cf.'' '''[[भ्रातृव्य|Bhrātṛvya]].'''

सत
<u>'''Sata'''</u> is the name of a vessel of some kind mentioned in the ritual.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1565> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 27, 88;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 7, 2, 13;<br> 8, 3, 14.</ref>

सतीन-कङ्कत
<u>'''Satīna-kaṅkata'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1566> The literal meaning seems to be ‘having a real comb.’</ref> is, in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1566> i. 191, 1.</ref> the name of some animal, according to Sāyaṇa an ‘aquatic snake.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_1566> ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98.</ref> 

सत्य-काम
<u>'''Satya-kāma'''</u> (‘lover of truth’) '''[[जाबाल|Jābāla]]''' (‘descendant of '''[[जबाला|Jabālā]]''') is the name of a teacher, the son of a slave girl by an unknown father. He was initiated as a '''Brahmacārin,''' or religious student, by '''[[गौतम|Gautama]] [[हारिद्रुमत|Hāridrumata]]''' according to the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1567> iv. 4, 1, ''et seq.''</ref> He is often cited as an authority in that [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1567> iv. 5, 1;<br> 6, 2;<br> 7, 2;<br> 8, 2;<br> 9, 10;<br> 10, 1;<br> v. 2, 3.</ref> and in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_1567> iv. 1, 14 (Mādhyaṃdina = iv. 1, 6 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> where he learns a certain doctrine from '''[[जानकि|Jānaki]] Āyasthūṇa.'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_1567> vi. 3, 19 (= vi. 3, 12).</ref> He is also mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_1567> viii. 7, 8.</ref> and the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1567> xiii. 5, 3, 1.</ref>

सत्य-यज्ञ
<u>'''Satya-yajña'''</u> (‘true sacrificer’) '''[[पौलुषि|Pauluṣi]]''' (‘descendant of '''Puluṣa'''’) '''[[प्राचीनयोग्य|Prācīnayogya]]''' (‘descendant of Prācīnayoga’) is the name of a teacher in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1568> x. 6, 1, 1.</ref> the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_1568> v. 11, 1.</ref> and the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_1568> iii. 40, 2 (in a [[वंश|Vaṃśa]], ‘list of teachers’).</ref> In the latter text he is said to have been the pupil of '''[[पुलुष प्राचीनयोग्य|Puluṣa Prācīnayogya]].'''

सत्य-वचस्
<u>'''Satya-vacas'''</u> (‘true-speaking’) '''[[राथीतर|Rāthītara]]''' (‘descendant of '''[[रथीतर|Rathītara]]'''’) is, in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (i. 9, 1), the name of a teacher who insisted on the importance of truth.<br>==Foot Notes==

सत्य-श्रवस्
<u>'''Satya-śravas'''</u> (‘of true renown’) '''[[वाय्य|Vāyya]]''' (‘descendant of Vayya’) is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1570> v. 79, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve2_1570> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 156.</ref> thinks that he was the son of '''[[सुनीथ शौचद्रथ|Sunītha Śaucadratha]].'''

सत्य-हविस्
<u>'''Satya-havis'''</u> is the name of a mythical [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]], or sacrificial priest, in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (i. 9, 1, 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

सत्याधिवाक चैत्ररथि
<u>'''Satyādhivāka Caitrarathi'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[चित्ररथ|Citraratha]]'''’) is the name of a man in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 39, 1). <br>==Foot Notes==

सत्वन्
<u>'''Satvan'''</u> in the '''Rigveda,'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1573> i. 133, 6;<br> 173, 5;<br> ii. 25, 4;<br> 30, 10;<br> iii. 49, 2, etc.</ref> and occasionally later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1573> v. 20, 8;<br> vi. 65, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 8. 20, etc.</ref> has the sense of ‘warrior.’

सत्वन्त्
<u>'''Satvant'''</u> is the name of a people who are stated in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1574> viii. 14, 3.</ref> to belong to the south. In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1574> xiii. 5, 4, 21.</ref> the defeat by '''[[भरत|Bharata]]''' of the Satvants, and his taking away the horse which they had prepared for an [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’), are referred to: this reference clearly shows that in another passage of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_1574> ii. 25, 6.</ref> the text must be altered from ''satvanām'' to ''Satvatām,'' ‘of the Satvants,’ against whom it seems the Bharatas made regular raids. The name has also been found by the St. Petersburg Dictionary, Cowell, and Max Müller in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]],<ref name=fx4_ve2_1574> iv. 1.</ref> but it is certain<ref name=fx5_ve2_1574> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 393, n., correcting Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 1, lxxvii.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 211, 212, 419;<br> 9, 254;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1908, 367.</ref> that the reading there is not ''[[सत्वन्|Satvan]]-Matsyeṣu,'' but ''sa-[[वश|Vaśa]]-Matsyeṣu.''

सदन
<u>'''Sadana.'''</u> See '''[[गृह|Gṛha]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सदंदि
<u>'''Sadaṃdi.'''</u> See '''[[तक्मन्|Takman]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सदस्
<u>'''Sadas.'''</u> See '''[[गृह|Gṛha]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सदस्य
<u>'''Sadasya.'''</u> See '''[[ऋत्व्इज्|Ṛtvij]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सदा-नीरा
<u>'''Sadā-nīrā,'''</u> ‘having water always’ (‘perennial’), is the name of a stream which, according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1579> i. 4, 1, 14 ''et seq.''</ref> was the boundary between the '''Kosalas''' and the '''Videhas.''' The river is identified by the native lexicographers with the Karatoyā,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1579> See ''Imperial Gazetteer of India,'' 15, 24.</ref> but this seems to be too far east. Weber's<ref name=fx3_ve2_1579> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 172, 181.</ref> identification  of it with the Gaṇḍakī<ref name=fx4_ve2_1579> See ''s.v.'' Great Gandak, ''Imperial Gazetteer of India,'' 12, 125.</ref> is probably correct; for though the Mahābhārata<ref name=fx5_ve2_1579> ii. 794.<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 398, n.</ref> distinguishes the two rivers, there is nothing to show that this is due to any good tradition.

सदा-पृण
<u>'''Sadā-pṛṇa'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1580> v. 44, 12. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 139.</ref>

सद्यन्
<u>'''Sadyan'''</u> in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ii. 8, 6, 1) is a misreading of '''[[सघन्|Saghan]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सध्रि
<u>'''Sadhri'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1582> v. 44, 10. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 139.</ref>

सनक
<u>'''Sanaka'''</u> occurs as the name of one of the two '''Kāpyas''' (the other being '''[[नवक|Navaka]]''') who took part in the sacrifice of the '''Vibhindukīyas,''' which is mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1583> iii. 233 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 38).</ref> Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve2_1583> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 147.</ref> thinks that the Sanakas are referred to as non-sacrificers in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1583> i. 33, 4.</ref> but this is very doubtful.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1583> Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 189.</ref>

सनग
<u>'''Sanaga.'''</u> See '''[[सनातन|Sanātana]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सनत्-कुमार
<u>'''Sanat-kumāra'''</u> is the name of a mythical sage in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vii. 1, 1; 26, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

सन-श्रुत
<u>'''Sana-śruta'''</u> (‘famed of old’) '''Ariṃdama''' (‘tamer of foes’) is mentioned as a [[महाराज|Mahārāja]] in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 34, 9).<br>==Foot Notes==

सनाच्-छव
<u>'''Sanāc-chava'''</u> is perhaps the proper name of a teacher in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1587> xx. 1.</ref> The Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve2_1587> xxxi. 3 (von Schroeder, [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, 2, 18, n. 5).</ref> has ''Śahanāśchiva.'' Very probably the reading of both texts is bad. 

सनातन
<u>'''Sanātana'''</u> is the name of a mythical [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā. In the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1588> ii. 5, 22;<br> iv. 5, 28 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> he appears in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) as the pupil of '''[[सनग|Sanaga]]''' and the teacher of '''[[सनारु|Sanāru]],''' both equally mythical persons.<br><br>^1 iv. 3, 3, 1.

सनारु
<u>'''Sanāru.'''</u> See '''[[सनातन|Sanātana]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सनिस्रस
<u>'''Sanisrasa.'''</u> See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सं-दंश
<u>'''Saṃ-daṃśa.'''</u> See '''[[गृह|Gṛha]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सं-दान
<u>'''Saṃ-dāna'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1592> i. 162, 8. 16.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1592> Av. vi. 103, 1;<br> 104, 1;<br> xi. 9, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 7, 2;<br> Sata patha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 3, 1, 22, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘bond,’ ‘halter,’ or ‘fetter.’

सं-धा
<u>'''Saṃ-dhā'''</u> denotes in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_1593> Av. xi. 10, 9, 15;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 7, 8, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 1, 6;<br> ii. 1, 1, 3;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 1.</ref> an ‘agreement’ or ‘compact.’

सं-धि
<u>'''Saṃ-dhi'''</u> denotes the ‘juncture’ of heaven and earth, the ‘horizon,’ in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1594> iii. 2, 1, 5;<br> x. 5, 4, 2.</ref> It also has the sense of ‘twilight’<ref name=fx2_ve2_1594> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 25;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 5, 1;<br> ii. 2, 9, 8;<br> dual;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 55;<br> ix. 4, 4, 13, etc. The later term is Saṃdhyā.</ref> as the juncture of light and dark.

सं-नहन
<u>'''Saṃ-nahana'''</u> in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_1595> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 1, 2, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 3, 6;<br> ii. 6, 1, 15, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘band’ or ‘rope.’ 

स-पत्न
<u>'''Sa-patna,'''</u> ‘rival,’ is a common word in the later Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1596> Av. i. 19, 4;<br> x. 6, 30;<br> xii. 2, 46;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 2, 2;<br> iii. 2, 8, 5, etc.</ref> being also found in the tenth Maṇḍala of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1596> x. 166, 1, etc.;<br> also in the compound ''[[सपत्न|sapatna]]-kan,'' ‘slaying rivals,’ x. 159, 5, etc.;<br> Av. i. 29, 5, etc.</ref> It is a curious masculine formed by analogy from '''[[स-पत्नी|Sa-patnī]],''' ‘co-wife,’ and so ‘female rival.’

स-पत्नी
<u>'''Sa-patnī'''</u> occurs in the Rigveda in the sense of ‘co-wife’;<ref name=fx1_ve2_1597> iii. 1, 10;<br> 6, 4.</ref> in the first and the last Maṇḍalas it means co-wife as a ‘rival.’<ref name=fx2_ve2_1597> i. 105, 8;<br> x. 145, 1-5 (''cf.'' in verse 2, ''patim me kevalam kuru,'' ‘make my husband exclusively mine’).</ref> In post-Vedic Sanskrit the word becomes a synonym for ‘rival.’

सप्त-गु
<u>'''Sapta-gu'''</u> is the reputed author of a Rigvedic hymn in a verse of which he is mentioned.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1598> x. 47, 6. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 17, 423.</ref>

सप्त सिन्धवः
<u>'''Sapta Sindhavaḥ,'''</u> ‘the seven rivers,’ occur only once in the Rigveda as the designation of a definite country,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1599> viii. 24, 27.</ref> while elsewhere<ref name=fx2_ve2_1599> Rv. i. 32, 12;<br> 34, 8;<br> 35, 8;<br> 71, 7;<br> 102, 2;<br> iv. 28, 1;<br> viii. 96, 1, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxviii. 26;<br> Atharvaveda, iv. 6, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 6, 1, etc.</ref> the seven rivers themselves are meant. Max Müller<ref name=fx3_ve2_1599> ''Chips,'' 1, 63. ''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 490, n.</ref> thinks that the five streams of the Panjab, with the Indus and the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]],''' are intended; others<ref name=fx4_ve2_1599> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 200;<br> Lassen, ''Indische Alterthumskunde,'' 1^2, 3;<br> Whitney, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 3, 311.</ref> hold that the '''[[कुभा|Kubhā]]''' should be substituted for the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]], or that perhaps the Oxus<ref name=fx5_ve2_1599> ''Cf.'' Thomas, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1883, 371 ''et seq.''</ref> must originally have been one of the seven. Zimmer<ref name=fx6_ve2_1599> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 21.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 278;<br> ''India, Old and New,'' 33.</ref> is probably right in laying no stress at all on any identifications; ‘seven’ being one of the favourite numbers in the Rigveda and later. 

सप्त सूर्याः
<u>'''Sapta Sūryāḥ,'''</u> the ‘seven suns’ referred to in the Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1600> Av. xiii. 3, 10;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 9.</ref> are named in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx2_ve2_1600> i. 7. ''Cf.'' the ‘seven tongues’ of Agni which are mentioned in the Rigveda, and each of which later receives an individual name: Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 89.</ref> as Āroga, Bhrāja, Paṭara, [[पतङ्ग|Pataṅga]], [[स्वर्णर|Svarṇara]], Jyotiṣīmant, and Vibhāsa, but these occur very rarely even later.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1600> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 266;<br> Hopkins, ''Great Epic of India,'' 475.</ref> Weber at one time<ref name=fx4_ve2_1600> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 170;<br> 2, 238.</ref> thought that the seven planets (see '''[[ग्रह|Graha]]''') were meant by the phrase, but later he abandoned the idea.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1600> ''Ibid.,'' 10, 271, n., where he compares the ''sapta diśo nānā-sūryāḥ,'' ‘seven regions with various suns,’ of Rv. ix. 114, 3.</ref> Probably the ‘seven rays’ of the Rigveda<ref name=fx6_ve2_1600> Rv. i. 105, 9;<br> viii. 72, 16;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 277.</ref> are meant.

सप्त-मानुष
<u>'''Sapta-mānuṣa'''</u> is found in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1601> viii. 39, 8.</ref> as an epithet of Agni, ‘belonging to the seven tribes.’ Hopkins<ref name=fx2_ve2_1601> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 278.</ref> thinks that this is a reference to the seven ‘family’ books of the Rigveda (ii.-viii.), but this seems less likely than the view of Roth,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1601> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> that ''[[सप्तमानुष|saptamānuṣa]]'' is equivalent to ''vaiśvānara.''

सप्त-वध्रि
<u>'''Sapta-vadhri'''</u> is the name of a protégé of the Aśvins, who appear from several passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1602> v. 78, 5;<br> viii. 73, 9;<br> x. 39, 9.</ref> to have rescued him from a tree in which he had got fastened. He is mentioned in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1602> iv. 29, 4.</ref> According to Geldner,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1602> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 190.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 156;<br> Baunack, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 50, 268.</ref> he is identical with '''Atri.'''

सप्ति
<u>'''Sapti'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1603> i. 85, 1, 6;<br> 162, 1;<br> ii. 34, 7;<br> iii. 22, 1, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1603> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 19, 22.</ref> denotes a ‘swift steed.’ 

सप्त्य
<u>'''Saptya'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda (viii. 41, 4) seems to denote a ‘racecourse.’<br>==Foot Notes==

स-बन्धु
<u>'''Sa-bandhu'''</u> (‘of the same kin’) in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1605> iii. 1, 10;<br> v. 47, 5;<br> viii. 20, 21, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1605> Av. vi. 15, 2;<br> viii. 2, 26;<br> xv. 8, 2. 3, etc.</ref> denotes ‘related.’

सभा
<u>'''Sabhā'''</u> is the name of an ‘assembly’ of the Vedic Indians as well as of the ‘hall’ where they met in assembly. It is often mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1606> vi. 28, 6;<br> viii. 4, 9;<br> x. 34, 6. ''Cf. [[सभा|sabhā]]-saha,'' ‘eminent in the assembly,’ x. 71, 10.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1606> Av. v. 31, 6;<br> vii. 12, 1, 2;<br> viii. 10, 5;<br> xii. 1, 56;<br> xix. 55, 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 7, 6, 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 7, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 45;<br> xvi. 24;<br> xx. 17;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 10, 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 3, 2, 3;<br> v. 3, 1, 10;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 9, etc.</ref> but its exact character is not certain. The hall was clearly used for dicing,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1606> Rv. x. 34, 6;<br> Av. v. 31, 6;<br> xii. 3, 46 (here ''[[द्यूत|dyūta]]'' is used in place of [[सभा|Sabhā]]).</ref> presurnably when the assembly was not transacting public business: a dicer is called ''[[सभा-स्थाणु|sabhā-sthāṇu]],'' ‘pillar of the assembly hall,’ doubtless because of his constant presence there.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1606> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 18;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 16, 1, with Sāyaṇa's note. Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 172, inclines to see in the formula (Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 45;<br> xx. 17;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 3, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, ix. 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 10, 2) ‘what sin we have committed in the village, the jungle, the Sabhā’ a reference to attacks on the great (Mahīdhara on Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 45), or partiality in deciding disputes (Mahīdhara, ''ibid.,'' xx. 17). But it may refer to gambling or other nonpolitical activity, as Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 398, takes it, though he renders it differently, ''ibid.,'' 44, 265.</ref> The hall also served, like the Homeric , as a meeting-place for social intercourse and general conversation about cows and so forth,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1606> Rv. vi. 28, 6. ''Cf.'' viii. 4, 9. So in Av. vii. 12, 2, the assembly is hailed as ''nariṣṭā,'' ‘merriment.’ But the same hymn (vii. 12, 3) contains a clear reference to serious speech in the [[सभा|Sabhā]]. For the blending of serious political work and amusement, ''cf.'' Tacitus, ''Germania,'' 22.</ref> possibly for debates and verbal contests.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1606> So Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 174, takes ''[[सभेय|sabheya]]'' in Rv. ii. 24, 13.</ref><br><br>According to Ludwig,<ref name=fx7_ve2_1606> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 253256. He quotes for this view Rv. viii. 4, 9;<br> x. 71, 10 (passages which are quite vague). ''Cf.'' also Rv. vii. 1, 4;<br> Av. xix. 57, 2.</ref> the [[सभा|Sabhā]] was an assembly not of all the people, but of the Brahmins and '''Maghavans''' (‘rich patrons’). This view can be supported by the expressions  ''[[सभेय|sabheya]],'' ‘worthy of the assembly,’ applied to a Brahmin,<ref name=fx8_ve2_1606> Rv. ii. 24, 13. ''Cf.'' i. 91, 20;<br> Av. xx. 128, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 22, etc. Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 276, sees in ''[[सभेय|sabheya]]'' the implication of ‘courtly manners,’ but this is rather doubtful;<br> manner is not conspicuous in Vedic society as in Homeric.</ref> ''rayiḥ sabhāvān,'' ‘wealth fitting for the assembly,’<ref name=fx9_ve2_1606> Rv. iv. 2, 5;<br> in i. 167, 3, ''sabhāvatī'' is applied to ‘speech,’ or perhaps to ''yoṣā,'' ‘woman.’</ref> and so on. But Bloomfield<ref name=fx10_ve2_1606> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 13.</ref> plausibly sees in these passages a domestic use of [[सभा|Sabhā]], which is recognized by the St. Petersburg Dictionary in several passages<ref name=fx11_ve2_1606> Av. viii. 10, 5 (where the sense is, however, clearly ‘assembly’;<br> see viii. 10, 6);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 8, 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 10, 3;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 14 (but here the sense is certainly ‘assembly hall,’;<br> see v. 3, 6, where the king is described as going to the assembly hall: ''[[सभा|sabhā]]-ga'') The exact sense given by the St. Petersburg Dictionary is the ‘society room’ in a dwelling-house.</ref> as relating to a house, not to the assembly at all. Zimmer<ref name=fx12_ve2_1606> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 174. But he ignores Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 4, 14;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 3, 6, which show that the king went to the [[सभा|Sabhā]] just as much as to the [[सम्इति|Samiti]], and he cannot adduce any passage to show that the Grāmaṇī presided.</ref> is satisfied that the [[सभा|Sabhā]] was the meetingplace of the village council, presided over by the '''Grāmaṇī.''' But of this there is no trace whatever. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx13_ve2_1606> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 123-125.</ref> seems right in maintaining that the [[सभा|Sabhā]] and the '''[[सम्इति|Samiti]]''' cannot be distinguished, and that the reference to well-born (''[[सु-जात|su-jāta]]'')<ref name=fx14_ve2_1606> Rv. vii. 1, 4.</ref> men being there in session is to the Āryan as opposed to the [[दास|Dāsa]] or [[शूद्र|Śūdra]], not to one class of Āryan as opposed to the other. Hillebrandt also sees in Agni ‘of the hall’ (''sabhya'') a trace of the fire used in sacrifice on behalf of the assembly when it met.<ref name=fx15_ve2_1606> Agni is ''sabhya,'' Av. viii. 10, 5;<br> xix. 55, 6. For the Rv., see iii. 23, 4;<br> v. 3, 11;<br> vii. 7, 5.</ref><br><br>Women did not go to the [[सभा|Sabhā]],<ref name=fx16_ve2_1606> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 7, 4.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 172174.</ref> for they were, of course, excluded from political activity. For the [[सभा|Sabhā]] as a courthouse, ''cf.'' '''[[ग्राम्यवादिन्|Grāmyavādin]].''' There is not a single notice of the work done by the [[सभा|Sabhā]].

सभा-चर
<u>'''Sabhā-cara'''</u> is one of the victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1607> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 2, 1 with Sāyaṇa's note. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 77, n. 1.</ref> The St. Petersburg  Dictionary thinks it is an adjective equivalent in sense to ''[[सभा|sabhā]]-ga,''’ ‘going to the assembly.’ As he is dedicated to [[धर्म|Dharma]], ‘Justice,’ it is difficult not to see in him a member of the [[सभा|Sabhā]] as a law court, perhaps as one of those who sit to decide cases: there is nothing to show whether the whole assembly did so, or only a chosen body. The special use of [[सभाचर|Sabhācara]] suggests the latter alternative. See also '''[[सभासद्|Sabhāsad]].'''

सभा-पति
<u>'''Sabhā-pati,'''</u> ‘lord of the assembly,’ is an epithet in the [[शतरुद्रिय|Śatarudriya]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1608> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 24;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 3, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 13, etc.</ref>

सभा-पाल
<u>'''Sabhā-pāla'''</u> is found in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 7, 4, 6), where the sense may be ‘guardian of an assembly hall.’<br>==Foot Notes==

सभाविन्
<u>'''Sabhāvin'''</u> in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 4, 16, 1) denotes, according to the commentator Sāyaṇa, the ‘keeper of a gambling hall.’<br>==Foot Notes==

सभा-सद्
<u>'''Sabhā-sad,'''</u> ‘sitter in the assembly,’ is probably a technical description of the assessors who decided legal cases in the assembly (''cf.'' '''[[सभाचर|Sabhācara]]'''). The term, which is found in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1611> iii. 29, 1 (of Yama);<br> vii. 12, 2;<br> xix. 55, 6.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1611> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, viii. 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 6, 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 1, 26;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 21, 14.</ref> cannot well merely denote any member of the assembly. It is also possible that the Sabhāsads, perhaps the heads of families, were expected to be present at the [[सभा|Sabhā]] oftener than the ordinary man: the meetings of the assembly for justice may have been more frequent than for general discussion and decision.

सभा-स्थाणु
<u>'''Sabhā-sthāṇu.'''</u> See '''[[सभा|Sabhā]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सभेय
<u>'''Sabheya.'''</u> See '''[[सभा|Sabhā]].''' <br>==Foot Notes==

सम्-अङ्क
<u>'''Sam-aṅka'''</u> is a word of obscure sense occurring in two passages of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1614> i. 12, 2;<br> vi. 50, 1.</ref> Bloomfield<ref name=fx2_ve2_1614> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 7, 142. ''Cf.'' St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> renders it ‘hook’ in the first, and takes it to mean an insect destructive of grain in the other.

समन
<u>'''Samana'''</u> is a word of somewhat doubtful sense in the Rigveda. Roth<ref name=fx1_ve2_1615> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> renders it either ‘battle’<ref name=fx2_ve2_1615> Rv. vi. 75, 3. 5;<br> ix. 96, 9;<br> x. 143, 4;<br> Av. vi. 92, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ix. 9.</ref> or ‘festival.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_1615> Rv. ii. 16, 7;<br> vi. 60, 2;<br> vii. 2, 5;<br> viii. 12, 9;<br> ix. 97, 47;<br> x. 55, 5;<br> 86, 10;<br> Av. ii. 36, 1.</ref> Pischel<ref name=fx4_ve2_1615> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 314.</ref> thinks that it was a general popular festivity to which women went to enjoy themselves,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1615> Rv. i. 124, 8 (''cf.'' '''Vrā''');<br> iv. 58, 8;<br> vi. 75, 4;<br> vii. 2, 5;<br> x. 86, 10;<br> 168, 2.</ref> poets to win fame,<ref name=fx6_ve2_1615> Rv. ii. 16, 7;<br> ix. 97, 47. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 38.</ref> bowmen to gain prizes at archery,<ref name=fx7_ve2_1615> Rv. vi. 75, 3. 5.</ref> horses to run races;<ref name=fx8_ve2_1615> Rv. ix. 96, 9;<br> Av. vi. 92, 2.</ref> and which lasted until morning<ref name=fx9_ve2_1615> Rv. i. 48, 6, which Roth takes as referring to men going to business.</ref> or until a conflagration, caused by the fires kept burning all night, scattered the celebrators.<ref name=fx10_ve2_1615> Rv. x. 69, 11. ''Cf.'' vii. 9, 4.</ref> Young women,<ref name=fx11_ve2_1615> Av. ii. 36, 1.</ref> elderly women,<ref name=fx12_ve2_1615> Rv. vii. 2, 5.</ref> sought there to find a husband, and courtezans to make profit of the occasion.<ref name=fx13_ve2_1615> Rv. iv. 58, 8, where, as in vi. 75, 4;<br> x. 168, 2, Roth sees the sense of ‘embrace.’ The parallel with the festivals of Greece, where only young girls were able freely to mix with strangers, and which afforded the basis of so many of the comedies of the later school, is striking (''cf.'' Mahaffy, ''Greek Literature,'' 1, 2, 259 ''et seq.'').<br><br>''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 190.</ref>

समर
<u>'''Samara'''</u> in the sense of ‘battle’ is found in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1616> vii. 9;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 15, 12.</ref> and, according to Geldner,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1616> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 190.</ref> in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1616> vi. 9, 2 (at the sacrifice;<br> ''cf. samarya,'' iv. 24, 8, etc.).</ref>

समा
<u>'''Samā'''</u> appears originally to have denoted ‘summer,’ a sense which may be seen in a few passages of the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1617> i. 35, 4;<br> ii. 6, 1;<br> iii. 10, 9. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 36.</ref>  Hence it also denotes more generally ‘season,’ a rare use.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1617> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 25, 7;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 41.</ref> More commonly it is simply ‘year’;<ref name=fx3_ve2_1617> Rv. iv. 57, 7;<br> x. 85, 5;<br> 124, 4;<br> Av. v. 8, 8;<br> vi. 75, 2, etc.</ref> but in one place the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_1617> vi. 2, 1, 25.</ref> interprets it in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx5_ve2_1617> xxvii. 1, with Mahīdhara's note. See Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 168, n. 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 372;<br> Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 301.</ref> as meaning ‘month,’ a doubtful sense.

समान
<u>'''Samāna.'''</u> See '''[[प्राण|Prāṇa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

समान-गोत्र
<u>'''Samāna-gotra'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1619> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 15.</ref> and '''[[समान|Samāna]]-jana'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1619> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 6, 9;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 2, 10.</ref> mean ‘belonging to the same family’ and ‘class’ respectively in the Brāhmaṇas. '''[[समान|Samāna]]-[[बन्धु|bandhu]],''' ‘having the same kin,’ is found in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1619> i. 113, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 1, 25.</ref>

समान्त
<u>'''Samānta'''</u> (‘having the same boundary’), ‘neighbour,’ and therefore ‘foe,’ occurs in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (ii. 1, 24).<br>==Foot Notes==

सम्-इति
<u>'''Sam-iti'''</u> denotes an ‘assembly’ of the Vedic tribe. It is already mentioned in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1621> i. 95, 8;<br> ix. 92, 6;<br> x. 97, 6;<br> 166, 4;<br> 191, 3.</ref> and often later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1621> Av. v. 19, 15;<br> vi. 88, 3;<br> vii. 12, 1;<br> xii. 1, 56, etc.</ref> sometimes in connexion with '''[[सभा|Sabhā]].'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1621> Av. vii. 12, 1;<br> xii. 1, 56;<br> xv. 9, 2. 3;<br> viii. 10, 5. 6.</ref> Ludwig<ref name=fx4_ve2_1621> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 253 ''et seq.''</ref> considers that the [[सम्इति|Samiti]] included all the people, primarily the ''viśaḥ,'' ‘subjects,’ but also the '''Maghavans''' and Brahmins if they desired, though the [[सभा|Sabhā]] was their special assembly. This view is not probable, nor is that of Zimmer,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1621> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 172 ''et seq.''</ref> that the [[सभा|Sabhā]] was the village assembly. Hillebrandt appears to be right in holding that [[सम्इति|Samiti]] and [[सभा|Sabhā]] are much the same, the one being the assembly, the other primarily the place of assembly.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1621> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 124, n. 6.</ref> <br><br>The king went to the assembly<ref name=fx7_ve2_1621> Rv. ix. 92, 6;<br> x. 97, 6 (where the reference is hardly to an oligarchy, as Zimmer, 176, 177, holds, but merely to the princes of the blood going to the assembly with the rest).</ref> just as he went to the [[सभा|Sabhā]]. That he was elected there, as Zimmer<ref name=fx8_ve2_1621> ''Op. cit.,'' 175, quoting Av. vi. 87, 88, with Rv. x. 173, and Av. v. 19, 15, with Av. iii. 4, 6.</ref> thinks, is as uncertain as whether he was elected at all (see '''[[राजन्|Rājan]]'''). But there are clear signs that concord between king and assembly were essential for his prosperity.<ref name=fx9_ve2_1621> Av. vi. 88, 3. Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 2, takes [[सम्इति|Samiti]] here and in v. 19, 15;<br> Rv. x. 166, 4;<br> 191, 3, to mean ‘union,’ but this is neither necessary nor probable.</ref><br><br>It is reasonable to assume that the business of the assembly was general deliberation on policy of all kinds, legislation so far as the Vedic Indian cared to legislate, and judicial work (''cf.'' '''[[सभासद्|Sabhāsad]]'''). But of all these occupations there is, perhaps as a result of the nature of the texts, little or no evidence directly available.<br><br>The gods had a [[सम्इति|Samiti]], hence called ''daivī,'' ‘divine,’<ref name=fx10_ve2_1621> Rv. x. 11, 8.</ref> just as they had a [[सभा|Sabhā]].<ref name=fx11_ve2_1621> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 11, 13, 14.</ref><br><br>The assembly disappears as an effective part of government in the Buddhist texts,<ref name=fx12_ve2_1621> ''Cf.'' Bühler, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 55, on the Parīsa.</ref> the Epic,<ref name=fx13_ve2_1621> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 148-152, who traces the decay of the old assembly through the aristocratic war council and the secret priestly conclave. It is, of course, very probable that at no time was the [[सम्इति|Samiti]] a place where any or much attention was paid to the views of the common man. Princes and great men spoke;<br> the rest approved or disapproved, as in Homeric times and in Germany (''cf.'' Lang, ''Anthropology and the Classics,'' 51 ''et seq.;<br>'' Tacitus, ''Germania,'' 11, 12, where their general duty of discussion and their criminal jurisdiction are mentioned).</ref> and the law-books.<ref name=fx14_ve2_1621> Foy, ''Die ko7nigliche Gewalt,'' 6, 7, 10.</ref>

सम्-इध्
<u>'''Sam-idh'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1622> iv. 4, 15;<br> vi. 15, 7;<br> 16, 11;<br> vii. 14, 1;<br> x. 12, 2, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1622> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, iii. 4;<br> xx. 25, etc.</ref> denotes the ‘fuel’ for kindling fire. Geldner<ref name=fx3_ve2_1622> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 191.</ref> inclines to see in one passage<ref name=fx4_ve2_1622> Rv. x. 52, 2.</ref> the name of a priest, the later Agnidh.

सम्-उद्र
<u>'''Sam-udra'''</u> (literally ‘gathering of waters’), ‘ocean,’ is a frequent word in the Rigveda and later. It is of importance in  so far as it indicates that the Vedic Indians knew the sea. This is, indeed, denied by Vivien de Saint Martin,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1623> ''Étude sur la géographie du Véda,'' 62 ''et seq. Cf.'' Wilson, ''Rigveda,'' 1, xii.</ref> but not only do Max Müller<ref name=fx2_ve2_1623> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 61 ''et seq.,'' quoting Rv. i. 71, 7;<br> 190, 7;<br> v. 78, 8;<br> vii. 49, 2;<br> 95, 2;<br> x. 58.</ref> and Lassen<ref name=fx3_ve2_1623> ''Indische Alterthumskunde,'' 1^2, 883.</ref> assert it, but even Zimmer,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1623> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 22 ''et seq. Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 143, 144.</ref> who is inclined to restrict their knowledge of the sea as far as possible, admits it in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1623> vii. 95, 2.</ref> and of course later.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1623> Av. iv. 10, 4 (pearl shell);<br> vi. 105, 3 (the outflow, ''vi-kṣara,'' of the ocean);<br> xix. 38, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 13, 1, etc.</ref> He points out that the ebb and flow of the sea are unknown, that the mouths of the Indus are never mentioned, that fish is not a known diet in the Rigveda (''cf.'' '''[[मत्स्य|Matsya]]'''), and that in many places [[सम्उद्र|Samudra]] is metaphorically used, as of the two oceans,<ref name=fx7_ve2_1623> Rv. x. 136, 5. ''Cf.'' Av. xi. 5, 6.</ref> the lower and the upper oceans,<ref name=fx8_ve2_1623> Rv. vii. 6, 7;<br> x. 98, 5.</ref> etc. In other passages he thinks that [[सम्उद्र|Samudra]] denotes the river Indus when it receives all its Panjab tributaries.<ref name=fx9_ve2_1623> See, ''e.g.,'' Rv. i. 71, 7;<br> iii. 36, 7;<br> 46, 4;<br> v. 85, 6;<br> vi. 36, 3;<br> vii. 95, 2;<br> viii. 16, 2;<br> 44, 25;<br> ix. 88, 6;<br> 107, 9;<br> 108, 16 (where reference is made to streams);<br> or Rv. i. 163, 1;<br> iv. 21, 3;<br> v. 55, 5;<br> viii. 6, 29, where land and [[सम्उद्र|Samudra]] are contrasted.</ref> It is probable that this is to circumscribe too narrowly the Vedic knowledge of the ocean, which was almost inevitable to people who knew the Indus. There are references to the treasures of the ocean,<ref name=fx10_ve2_1623> ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 47, 6;<br> vii. 6, 7;<br> ix. 97, 44.</ref> perhaps pearls or the gains of trade,<ref name=fx11_ve2_1623> ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 48, 3;<br> 56, 2;<br> iv. 55, 6;<br> and the general parallelism of the Dioscuri and the Aśvins.</ref> and the story of '''[[भुज्यु|Bhujyu]]''' seems to allude to marine navigation.<br><br>That there was any sea trade with Babylon in Vedic times cannot be proved: the stress Iaid<ref name=fx12_ve2_1623> ''E.g.,'' by Weber, ''Indian Literature,'' 3.</ref> on the occurrence in the Hebrew Book of Kings<ref name=fx13_ve2_1623> 1. Kings x. 22.</ref> of ''qof'' and ''tukhiīm,'' ‘monkey’ (''kapi'') and ‘peacock,’ is invalidated by the doubtful date of the Book of Kings. There is, besides, little reason to assume an early date for the trade that no doubt developed later, perhaps about 700 B.C.<ref name=fx14_ve2_1623> See Kennedy, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1898, 241-288;<br> Bühler, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 79 ''et seq.;<br> Indisehe Palœographie,'' 17-19, who much exaggerates the antiquity of the traffic;<br> Vincent Smith, ''Early History of India,'' 25, n.</ref> <br><br>In the later texts [[सम्उद्र|Samudra]] repeatedly means the sea.<ref name=fx15_ve2_1623> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 8, 2;<br> vii. 5, 1, 2. It is described as unfailing in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 16, 7 (''cf.'' iii. 39, 7);<br> it encircles the earth, ''ibid.,'' viii. 25, 1. The eastern and western oceans in Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 11 (''cf.'' x. 6, 4, 1), though metaphorical, probably indicate an acquaintance with both seas, the Indian Ocean and the Arabian Sea.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 14-19;<br> Pischel and Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, xxiii.</ref>

सम्राज्
<u>'''Samrāj'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1624> iii. 55, 7;<br> 56, 5;<br> iv. 21, 1;<br> vi. 27, 8;<br> viii. 19, 32.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1624> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, v. 32;<br> xiii. 35;<br> xx. 5, etc.</ref> means ‘superior ruler, ‘sovereign,’ as expressing a greater degree of power than ‘king’ ('''[[राजन्|Rājan]]'''). In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_1624> v. 1, 1, 13. ''Cf.'' xii. 8, 3, 4;<br> xiv. 1, 3, 8.</ref> in accordance with its curious theory of the '''[[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]]''' and '''[[राजसूय|Rājasūya]],''' the [[सम्राज्|Samrāj]] is asserted to be a higher authority than a king, and to have become one by the sacrifice of the [[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]]. There is, however, no trace of the use of the word as ‘emperor’ in the sense of an ‘overlord of kings,’ probably because political conditions furnished no example of such a status, as for instance was attained in the third century B.C. by Aśoka. At the same time [[सम्राज्|Samrāj]] denotes an important king like '''[[जनक|Janaka]]''' of '''[[विदेह|Videha]].'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_1624> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 3, 2, 1. 6;<br> 2, 2, 3;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 1, 1;<br> 3, 1. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Über den [[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]],'' 8.</ref> It is applied in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_1624> viii. 14, 2. 3. The other names are given as follows: For the northerners it is [[विराज्|Virāj]]: for the southerners, [[स्वराज्|Svarāj]];<br> for the Satvants, [[भोज|Bhoja]]: for the middle people (Kuru-[[पञ्चाल|Pañcāla]], [[वश|Vaśa]], and [[उशीनर|Uśīnara]]), [[राजन्|Rājan]] simply. This is probably a sound tradition.</ref> as the title of the eastern kings. ''Cf.'' '''[[राज्य|Rājya]].'''

सरघ्
<u>'''Saragh,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1625> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 3, 14.</ref> '''Saraghā,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1625> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxi. 4, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 10, 10, 1.</ref> both denote ‘bee’ in the Brāhmaṇas. See also '''[[सरह्|Sarah]].'''

सरयु
<u>'''Sarayu'''</u> is mentioned thrice in the Rigveda as the name of river. '''[[चित्ररथ|Citraratha]]''' and Arṇa are said to have been defeated apparently by the '''Turvaśas''' and '''Yadus''' who crossed the  [[सरयु|Sarayu]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1626> iv. 30, 18. This passage gives no help, because the possibility is open either to suppose that the [[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]], Yadu are not mentioned as defeating the Āryans [[चित्ररथ|Citraratha]] and Arṇa;<br> or, if they are, to suppose that they may have come east against the two.</ref> [[सरयु|Sarayu]] appears in one passage with '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]''' and '''[[सिन्धु|Sindhu]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1626> x. 64, 9.</ref> and in another with '''[[रसा|Rasā]], [[अनितभा|Anitabhā]],''' and '''Kubha.'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1626> v. 53, 9.</ref> Later, in the post-Vedic period, Sarayū, rarely [[सरयु|Sarayu]], is the name of a river in Oudh, the modern Sarjū.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1626> This is a tributary joining the Gogrā, the great river of Oudh, on the left of its upper course. The name Sarjū is also applied to the Gogrā itself below '''Bahrāmghāt.''' A branch of the Lower Gogrā, given off on the right, flowing in an old bed of the Gogrā, and falling into the Ganges after passing Balliā, is called the Chhotī (Lesser) Sarjū. ''Cf. Imperial Gazetteer of India,'' 22, 109;<br> 12, 302 (Gogrā);<br> 23, 418 (Eastern Tons);<br> 26, Plate 31.</ref> Zimmer<ref name=fx5_ve2_1626> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 17, 45. ''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 2^2, xxv;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 323.</ref> regards this as the river meant in all the Vedic passages, seeing in the last,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1626/> which may be used as an argument for locating the [[सरयु|Sarayu]] in the Panjab, a reference to the north-east monsoon as well as to the usual monsoon from the west. Hopkins<ref name=fx6_ve2_1626> ''Religions of India,'' 34.</ref> thinks that the [[सरयु|Sarayu]] is to be found in the west, and Ludwig<ref name=fx7_ve2_1626> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 280.</ref> identifies it with the Kurum ('''[[क्रुमु|Krumu]]'''). Vivien de St. Martin considered it to be probably identical with the united course of the '''[[शुतुद्री|Śutudrī]]''' (Sutlej) and '''[[विपाश्|Vipāś]]''' (Beas).

सरस्
<u>'''Saras'''</u> denotes ‘lake’ in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_1627> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 47, 48;<br> xxx. 16.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1627> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 33, 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 9;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 5, 3.</ref>

सरस्वती
<u>'''Sarasvatī'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1628> Literally, ‘abounding in pools,’ perhaps with reference to its condition when the water was low. The name corresponds phonetically to the Iranian Haraqaiti (the modern Helmand).</ref> is the name of a river frequently mentioned in the Rigveda and later. In many passages<ref name=fx2_ve2_1628> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 2, 1, 4;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 10, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 2, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 1, 14;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 19, 1. 2;<br> probably Av. vi. 30, 1. This list is according to Roth's view, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 3''c.''</ref> of the later texts it is certain the river meant is the modern [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]], which loses  itself in the sands of Patiala (see '''[[विनशन|Vinaśana]]'''). Even Roth<ref name=fx3_ve2_1628> Rv. iii. 23, 4 (where the [[दृषद्वती|Dṛṣadvatī]] appears);<br> x. 64, 9: 75, 5 (where the Śindhu also is mentioned).</ref> admits that this river is intended in some passages of the Rigveda. With the '''[[दृषद्वती|Dṛṣadvatī]]'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_1628> Probably the modern Chautang, which flows to the east of Thanesar. ''Cf.'' Oldham, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 25, 58;<br> ''Imperial Gasetteer of India,'' 26, Plate 32.</ref> it formed the western boundary of [[ब्रह्मावर्त|Brahmāvarta]] (see '''[[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]]'''). It is the holy stream of early Vedic India. The Sūtras<ref name=fx5_ve2_1628> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 3, 20;<br> xxiv. 6, 22;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 15, 1;<br> 18, 13;<br> 19, 4;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xii. 6, 2. 3;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 29.</ref> mention sacrifices held on its banks as of great importance and sanctity.<br><br>In many other passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx6_ve2_1628> i. 89, 3;<br> 164, 19;<br> ii. 41, 16 ''et seq.;<br>'' 30, 8;<br> 32, 8;<br> iii. 54, 13;<br> v. 42, 12;<br> 43, 11;<br> 46, 2;<br> vi. 49, 7;<br> 50, 12;<br> 52, 6;<br> vii. 9, 5;<br> 36, 6;<br> 39, 5;<br> 40, 3;<br> viii. 21, 17;<br> 54, 4;<br> x. 17, 7;<br> 30, 12;<br> 131, 5;<br> 184, 2.</ref> and even later,<ref name=fx7_ve2_1628> Av. iv. 4. 6;<br> v. 23, 1;<br> vi. 3, 2;<br> 89, 3;<br> vii. 68, 1;<br> xiv. 2, 15. 20;<br> xvi. 4, 4;<br> xix. 32, 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, 1, 8, 13, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 93;<br> xxxiv. 11;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 2, 4;<br> xi. 4, 3, 3;<br> xii. 7, 1, 12;<br> 2, 5;<br> Bṛnadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 3, 8. These passages should all be classed in n. 2.</ref> Roth held that another river, the '''[[सिन्धु|Sindhu]]''' (Indus), was really meant: only thus could it be explained why the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] is called the ‘foremost of rivers’ (''nadītamā''),<ref name=fx8_ve2_1628> Rv. ii. 41, 16.</ref> is said to go to the ocean,<ref name=fx9_ve2_1628> Rv. vi. 61, 2. 8;<br> vii. 96, 2.</ref> and is referred to as a large river, on the banks of which many kings,<ref name=fx10_ve2_1628> Rv. viii. 21, 18.</ref> and, indeed, the five tribes, were located.<ref name=fx11_ve2_1628> Rv. vi. 61, 12.</ref> This view is accepted by Zimmer<ref name=fx12_ve2_1628> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 5-10.</ref> and others.<ref name=fx13_ve2_1628> ''E.g.,'' Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 1, 60;<br> 2, 90, etc.;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 201, 202.</ref><br><br>On the other hand, Lassen<ref name=fx14_ve2_1628> ''Indische Alterthumshunde,'' 1^2, 118.</ref> and Max Müller<ref name=fx15_ve2_1628> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 60.</ref> maintain the identity of the Vedic [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] with the later [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]].<ref name=fx16_ve2_1628> In the enumeration of rivers (evidently from east to west) in Rv. x. 75, 5, [[गङ्गा|Gaṅgā]], [[यमुना|Yamunā]], [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]], [[शुतुद्री|Śutudrī]], the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] comes between the Jumna and the Sutlej, the position of the modern Sarsūti (Saraswatī), which, flowing to the west of Thanesar, is joined in Patiala territory by a more westerly stream, the Ghaggar, and, passing Sirsa, is lost in the desert at Bhatnair;<br> but a dry river bed (Hakra or Ghaggar) can be traced from that point to the Indus. See ''Imperial Gasetteer of India,'' 26, Plate 32. ''Cf.'' also Oldham, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 25, 49-76.</ref> The latter is of opinion that in Vedic times the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] was as large a stream as the Sutlej, and that it actually reached the  sea either after union with the Indus or not, being the ‘iron citadel,’ as the last boundary on the west, a frontier of the Panjab against the rest of India. There is no conclusive evidence of there having been any great change in the size or course of the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]], though it would be impossible to deny that the river may easily have diminished in size. But there are strong reasons to accept the identification of the later and the earlier [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] throughout. The insistence on the divine character of the river is been in the very hymn<ref name=fx17_ve2_1628> Rv. ii. 41, 16 (''devitame'').</ref> which refers to it as the support of the five tribes, and corresponds well with its later sacredness. Moreover, that hymn alludes to the '''Pārāvatas,''' a people shown by the later evidence of the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx18_ve2_1628> See '''[[पारावत|Pārāvata]],''' and ''cf.'' '''[[बृसय|Bṛsaya]].'''</ref> to have been in the east, a very long way from their original home, if [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] means the Indus. Again, the '''Pūrus,''' who were settled on the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]],<ref name=fx19_ve2_1628> Rv. vii. 95, 96. Ludwig, ''op. cit.,'' 3, 175, admits that the Indus cannot be meant here. See Hillebrandt. ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 115.</ref> could with great difficulty be located in the far west. Moreover, the five tribes might easily be held to be on the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]], when they were, as they seem to have been, the western neighbours of the '''Bharatas''' in '''[[कुरुक्षेत्र|Kurukṣetra]],''' and the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] could easily be regarded as the boundary of the Panjab in that sense. Again, the ‘seven rivers’ in one passage<ref name=fx20_ve2_1628> Rv. viii. 24, 27. The connexion of [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] and the seven rivers is rather vague. In Rv. viii. 54, 4, [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] and the seven rivers are separately invoked, and in vi. 61, 10, 12, she is referred to as ‘seven-sistered’ (''saptasvasā''). In vii. 36, 6, she is called the ‘seventh,’ which makes the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] one of the rivers. If the former passages are to be treated as precise, then ''saptasvasā'' may be considered to show that the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]] was outside the river system (which would then be Indus, [[कुभा|Kubhā]], and the five rivers of the Panjab;<br> see '''[[सप्त सिन्धवः|Sapta Sindhavaḥ]]''');<br> but the expression may be loosely meant for one of seven sisters.</ref> clearly designate a district: it is most probable that they are not the five rivers with the Indus and the '''[[कुभा|Kubhā]]''' (Cabul river), but the five rivers, the Indus and the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]]. Nor is it difficult to see why the river is said to flow to the sea: either the Vedic poet had never followed the course of the river to its end, or the river did actually penetrate the desert either completely or for a long distance, and only in the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] period was its disappear-  ance in the desert found out. It is said, indeed, in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx21_ve2_1628> xxxiv. 11.</ref> that the five rivers go to the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]], but this passage is not only late (as the use of the word '''[[देश|Deśa]]''' shows), but it does not say that the five rivers meant are those of the Panjab. Moreover, the passage has neither a parallel in the other Saṃhitās, nor can it possibly be regarded as an early production; if it is late it must refer to the later [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]].<br><br>Hillebrandt,<ref name=fx22_ve2_1628> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 99 ''et seq.;<br>'' 3, 372-378.</ref> on the whole, adopts this view of the [[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]],<ref name=fx23_ve2_1628> He sees this sense in the Rigveda everywhere, except in the passages indicated in notes 24 and 25.</ref> but he also sees in it, besides the designation of a mythical stream, the later Vaitaraṇī,<ref name=fx24_ve2_1628> vii. 95, 6;<br> x. 17, 7;<br> Av. vii. 68, 2;<br> xiv. 2, 20;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxxv. 10, 11.</ref> as well as the name of the Arghandab in Arachosia.<ref name=fx25_ve2_1628> Rv. vi. 49, 7;<br> 61;<br> possibly Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 11.</ref> This opinion depends essentially on his theory that the sixth Maṇḍala of the Rigveda places the scene of its action in Iranian lands, as opposed to the seventh Maṇḍala: it is as untenable as that theory itself.<ref name=fx26_ve2_1628> See '''Divodāsa.'''</ref> Brunnhofer<ref name=fx27_ve2_1628> Bezzenberger's ''Beiträge,'' 10, 261, n. 2.</ref> at one time accepted the Iranian identification, but later<ref name=fx28_ve2_1628> ''Iran und Turan,'' 127.<br><br>''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 337 ''et seq.,'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 141, 142;<br> ''Vedic Mythology,'' pp. 86-88;<br> von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 84, 164.</ref> decided for the Oxus, which is quite out of the question. See also '''[[प्लक्ष प्रास्रवण|Plakṣa Prāsravaṇa]].'''

सरह्
<u>'''Sarah'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1629> i. 112, 21.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1629> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 3, 12, 12;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 1, 4. The stem is given as Saraṭ in the Uṇādisūtra, 1, 133;<br> but '''[[सरघ्|Saragh]]''' shows that [[सरह्|Sarah]] must be meant (''cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 238, n. 2).<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 97.</ref> denotes ‘bee.’ ''Cf.'' '''Saragha.'''

सरित्
<u>'''Sarit'''</u> denotes ‘stream’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1630> iv. 58, 6;<br> vii. 70, 2;<br> Av. xii. 2, 41;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 2, 1, 11, etc.</ref> and later.^2 

सरीसृप
<u>'''Sarīsṛpa'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1631> x. 162, 3.</ref> and often later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1631> Av. iii. 10, 6: xix. 7, 1;<br> 48, 3, etc.</ref> any ‘creeping animal’ or ‘reptile.’

सर्प
<u>'''Sarpa,'''</u> ‘serpent,’ occurs once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1632> x. 16, 6.</ref> where '''Ahi''' is the usual word, but often later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1632> Av. x. 4, 23;<br> xi. 3, 47;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 5, 4, 1;<br> iii. 1, 1, 1, etc.</ref>

सर्प-राज्ञी
<u>'''Sarpa-rājñī,'''</u> ‘serpent-queen,’ is the alleged authoress of a hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1633> x. 189.</ref> according to the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1633> i. 5, 4, 1;<br> vii. 3, 1, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 6, 6;<br> ii. 2, 6, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 23, 1, 2.</ref>

सर्प-विद्या
<u>'''Sarpa-vidyā,'''</u> the ‘science of snakes,’ is enumerated in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] among branches of learning. It must have been reduced to fixed rules, since a section (''[[पर्वन्|parvan]]'') of it is referred to as studied. The Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1634> i. 1, 10. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 367, n. 3.</ref> has the form [[सर्प|Sarpa]]-veda.<br><br>^1 xiii. 4, 3, 9. ''Cf.'' Śānkhāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvi. 2, 25. The Āśvalāyana Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 7, 5, has '''[[विष-विद्या|Viṣa-vidyā]],''' and the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vii. 1. 2. 4; 2, 1; 4, 1; 7, 1) has ''sarpadevajana-[[विद्या|vidyā]].''

सर्पि वात्सि
<u>'''Sarpi Vātsi'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[वत्स|Vatsa]]'''’) is the name of a teacher in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1635> vi. 24, 15. Aufrecht, ''Altareya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],'' 424, takes the name to be Sarpir. The point is, of course, doubtful, since the word occurs in the nominative only.</ref>

सर्पिस्
<u>'''Sarpis'''</u> denotes ‘melted butter,’ whether in a liquid or solidified condition, and not differing from '''[[घृत|Ghṛta]]''' according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary. Roth there rejects the definition cited by Sāyaṇa in his commentary on the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1636> i. 3, 5.</ref> which discriminates [[सर्पिस्|Sarpis]] as the liquid and [[घृत|Ghṛta]] as the solid condition of the butter. The word is repeatedly mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1636> i. 127, 1;<br> v. 6, 9;<br> x. 18, 7.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1636> Av. i. 15, 4;<br> ix. 6, 41;<br> x. 9, 12;<br> xii. 3, 45;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 10, 1, etc.</ref> 

सर्व-चरु
<u>'''Sarva-caru'''</u> is found in a passage of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1637> vi. 1, 1.</ref> and of the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_1637> xxix. 1.</ref> where the gods are referred to as holding a sacrifice ''sarvacarau.'' The word is the name of a man according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary; the name of a place<ref name=fx3_ve2_1637> Sāyaṇa on [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> seems possible, or even a mere adjective may be meant.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1637> Aufrecht, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],'' 425, n. 1, who suggests that ''yajñe'' is to be supplied.</ref>

सर्व-वेदस
<u>'''Sarva-vedasa'''</u> denotes in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas either a sacrifice in which the sacrificer gives his all to the priests,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1638> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 7, 7;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 14;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 3, 1.</ref> or the whole property of a man.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1638> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 1, 1, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 8, 1;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 7, 15;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 6, 1, 15, etc.</ref>

सर्षप
<u>'''Sarṣapa,'''</u> denoting ‘mustard’ or ‘mustard seed,’ occurs only a few times in later Vedic texts.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1639> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 14, 3. ''Cf.'' Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Srauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 15, 8, etc. It is common in the later language.</ref>

सला-वृकी
<u>'''Salā-vṛkī.'''</u> See '''[[सालावृक|Sālāvṛka]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सलिल-वात
<u>'''Salila-vāta'''</u> occurs in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_1641> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 4, 12, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxiv. 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 16, 4.</ref> as an adjective meaning ‘favoured with a wind from the water.’<ref name=fx2_ve2_1641> Or, according to the commentator, ''salilākhyena [[वात|vāta]]-viśeṣeṇa anugṛhītaḥ,'' ‘favoured by a kind of wind called Salila.’</ref> It probably refers to the wind from the ocean, the south-west monsoon.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1641> ''Indian Empire,'' 1, 110. The monsoon is little noted in the Vedic texts, except in so far as the Marut hymns may be deemed to be a description of the monsoon. See Rv. i. 19, 7;<br> 37, 6 ''et seq.;<br>'' 38, 8;<br> 64, 8;<br> 88, 5;<br> v. 83, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' 85, 4;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 42-44.</ref> 

सल्व
<u>'''Salva'''</u> is the name of a people mentioned in a passage of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1642> x. 4, 1, 10.</ref> which records a boast by '''[[श्यापर्ण सायकायन|Śyāparṇa Sāyakāyana]]''' that if a certain rite of his had been completed, his race would have been the nobles, Brahmins, and peasants of the Salvas, and even as it was his race would surpass the Salvas. This people appears also to be alluded to as ''Sālvīḥ (prajāḥ)'' in the [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] Pāṭha,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1642> ii. 11, 12.</ref> where they are said to have declared that their king was '''Yaugandhari''' when they stayed their chariots<ref name=fx3_ve2_1642> Winternitz, ''[[मन्त्र|Mantra]]-pāṭha,'' xlv-xlvii, sees in the verse an allusion to the Sālva women turning round the wheel (? spinning-wheel). But a reference to a warlike raid seems more plauaible.</ref> on the banks of the '''[[यमुना|Yamunā]].''' There is later evidence<ref name=fx4_ve2_1642> Mahābhārata, iv. 1, 12;<br> viii. 44 (45), 14. The Yugandharas are also referred to in a Kārikā quoted in the Kāśikā Vṛtti on Pāṇini, iv. 1, 173.</ref> indicating that the Sālvas or Śālvas were closely connected with the '''Kuru-Pañcālas,''' and that apparently some of them, at least, were victorious near the banks of the [[यमुना|Yamunā]]. There is no good evidence to place them in the north-west in Vedic times.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1642> ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 215. Later, they may have been found in Rājasthān, Lassen, ''Indische Alterthumskunde,'' 1^2, 760.</ref>

सव्य-ष्ठा
<u>'''Savya-ṣṭhā,'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1643> Av. viii. 8, 23.</ref> '''Savya-ṣṭhṛ,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1643> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 2, 4, 9;<br> 3, 1, 8;<br> 4, 3, 17, 18.</ref> '''Savye-ṣṭha,'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1643> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]. i. 7, 9, 1.</ref> and '''Savya-stha'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_1643> [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 62, n. 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 8.</ref> are all various forms of the word for ‘car-fighter,’ as opposed to '''[[सारथि|Sārathi]],''' ‘charioteer,’ showing that, as was natural, the fighter stood on the left of the driver. The commentators<ref name=fx5_ve2_1643> On Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 1, 8;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> are inclined to see in the [[सव्यष्ठा|Savyaṣṭhā]] merely another ‘charioteer,’ but this is quite unjustifiable,<ref name=fx6_ve2_1643> Eggeling, ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 235.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 296.</ref> and is perhaps due to later caste prejudice against a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]] charioteer.

सस
<u>'''Sasa'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1644> i. 51, 3;<br> x. 79, 3.</ref> denotes ‘herb’ or ‘grass.’<ref name=fx1_ve2_1644/> The word is also applied to the Soma plant<ref name=fx2_ve2_1644> iii. 5, 6;<br> iv. 5, 7, etc.</ref> and the sacrificial straw.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1644> v. 21, 4.</ref> 

ससर्परी
<u>'''Sasarparī'''</u> is a word occurring in two curious verses of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1645> iii. 53, 15, 16.</ref> According to a later interpretation,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1645> Bṛhaddevatā, iii. 113, with Macdonell's notes. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 159.</ref> it designates a particular kind of skill in speech which '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]''' obtained from '''[[जमद्अग्नि|Jamadagni]].''' What it was is quite uncertain.

सस्य
<u>'''Sasya'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1646> vii. 11, 1;<br> viii. 10, 24.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1646> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 3, 3;<br> v. 1, 7, 3;<br> vii. 5, 20, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 2, 2, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 284.</ref> regularly denotes ‘corn’ generally. It corresponds to the Avestan ''hahya.'' See '''[[कृषि|Kṛṣi]].'''

सह
<u>'''Saha'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1647> xi. 6, 15. ''Cf.'' Sāmavidhāna [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 10.</ref> is, according to Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1647> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 2''b.''</ref> the name of a plant, but Bloomfield<ref name=fx3_ve2_1647> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 648.<br><br>''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 642;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 72.</ref> thinks the word is only an adjective meaning ‘mighty.’

सह-देव
<u>'''Saha-deva'''</u> is the name of a prince in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1648> i. 100, 17.</ref> where he is victorious over the '''Śimyus''' and '''Dasyus.''' It is quite probable that he is identical with King [[सहदेव|Sahadeva]] [[सार्ञ्जय|Sārñjaya]], who is mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1648> ii. 4, 4, 3. 4. ''Cf.'' xii. 8, 2, 3.</ref> as having once been called '''[[सुप्लन् सार्ञ्जय|Suplan Sārñjaya]],''' and as having changed his name because of his success in performing the [[दाक्षायण|Dākṣāyaṇa]] sacrifice. In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_1648> vii. 34, 9.</ref> he is mentioned with '''Somaka Sahadevya,''' who also appears in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1648> iv. 15, 7 ''et seq.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 132;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 105, 106.</ref>

सह-देवी
<u>'''Saha-devī'''</u> is the name of a plant in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1649> vi. 59, 2. ''Cf.'' Grill, ''Hundert Lieder,''^2 163;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 325;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 490, who does not accept this reading. A plant called [[सहदेव|Sahadeva]] occurs in the Sāmavidhāna [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 10.</ref> according to the reading of the commentary. 

सहमान
<u>'''Sahamāna'''</u> is the name of a plant in the Atharvaveda (ii. 25, 2; iv. 17, 2; viii. 2, 6; 7, 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

सहो-जित्
<u>'''Saho-jit.'''</u> See '''Jaitrāyaṇa.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सांवरणि
<u>'''Sāṃvaraṇi'''</u> is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1652> viii. 51, 1.</ref> in one passage, where it naturally seems to be a patronymic (‘descendant of Saṃvaraṇa’) of Manu. According to Bloomfield,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1652> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 180, n.</ref> it is a corruption for '''[[सावर्णि|Sāvarṇi]],''' a reference to Manu's birth from the ''savarṇā,'' ‘similar’ female who was substituted for Saraṇyū according to the legend (see '''Manu'''). This is possible, but not certain. Scheftelowitz<ref name=fx3_ve2_1652> ''Die Apokryphen des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 38.</ref> thinks that the reading of the Kaśmir manuscript of the Rigveda, which has ''sāṃvaraṇam,'' ‘found on the sacrificial ground,’ as an epithet of Soma, is to be preferred. But this seems quite improbable.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1652> See Oldenberg, ''Go7ttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen,'' 1907, 237.</ref> We must either recognize a real man called Manu [[सांवरणि|Sāṃvaraṇi]]; or take Manu as one name, [[सांवरणि|Sāṃvaraṇi]] as another; or admit that Manu [[सांवरणि|Sāṃvaraṇi]] is simply Manu with a patronymic derived from an unknown legend.

साकम्-अश्व देवरात
<u>'''Sākam-[[अश्व|aśva]] Devarāta'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]],''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) which concludes the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka (xv. 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

सांकृती-पुत्र
<u>'''Sāṃkṛtī-putra'''</u> (‘son of a female descendant of Saṃkṛta’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[आलम्बायनीपुत्र|Ālambāyanīputra]]'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1654> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 5, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref> or '''[[आलम्बीपुत्र|Ālambīputra]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1654> ''Ibid.,'' vi. 4, 32 Mādhyaṃdina.</ref> in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].

सांकृत्य
<u>'''Sāṃkṛtya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Saṃkṛti,’ is the name of a teacher whose pupil was '''[[पाराशर्य|Pārāśarya]]''' in the first two Vaṃśas (lists of teachers) in the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1655> ii. 5, 20;<br> iv. 5, 26. A [[सांकृत्य|Sāṃkṛtya]] occurs also in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Prātiśākhya, viii. 21;<br> x. 21;<br> xvi. 16.</ref> 

साची-गुण
<u>'''Sācī-guṇa'''</u> is mentioned, apparently as a place in the territory of the '''Bharatas,''' in a verse occurring in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1656> viii. 23, 4.</ref> Leumann,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1656> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 80, n. 5. This conjecture seems improbable.</ref> however, thinks an epithet of Indra, Śācīgu, may be meant.

सांजीवी-पुत्र
<u>'''Sāṃjīvī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of Sāṃjīvī,’ is the name of a teacher who appears in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) at the end of the tenth Kāṇḍa of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1657> x. 6, 5, 9.</ref> and at the end of the fourteenth Kāṇḍa in the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] recension,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1657> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 5. 4 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref> as a pupil of '''[[माण्डूकायनि|Māṇḍūkāyani]].''' In the Vaṃśas at the end of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] in both recensions<ref name=fx3_ve2_1657> ''Ibid.,'' vi. 4, 32 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 5, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).<br><br>''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, xxxiv ''et seq.;<br>'' Wéber, ''Indian Literature,'' 131.</ref> he is given as a pupil of '''[[प्राश्नीपुत्र|Prāśnīputra]] [[आसुरिवासिन्|Āsurivāsin]].''' It seems clear that he united in himself two lines of teachers--that of the tradition of the firecult from '''[[शाण्डिल्य|Śāṇḍilya]],''' and that of the tradition of '''[[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]].'''

साति औष्ट्राक्षि
<u>'''Sāti Auṣṭrākṣi'''</u> (‘descendant of Uṣṭrākṣa’) is the name of a teacher in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1658> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref>

सात्य-कामि
<u>'''Sātya-kāmi'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[सत्यकाम|Satyakāma]]'''’) is the patronymic of '''[[केशिन्|Keśin]]''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (ii. 6, 2, 3).<br>==Foot Notes==

सात्य-कीर्त
<u>'''Sātya-kīrta'''</u> is the name of a school of teachers mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 32, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

सात्य-यज्ञ
<u>'''Sātya-yajña'''</u> (‘descendant of Saryayajña’) is the name of a teacher in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 1, 1, 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

सात्य-यज्ञि
<u>'''1. Sātya-yajñi'''</u> (‘descendant of Satyayajña’) is the patronymic of '''Somaśuṣma''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xi. 6, 2, 1. 3; xiii. 4, 2, 4; 5, 3, 9). <br>==Foot Notes==

सात्य-यज्ञि
<u>'''2. Sātya-yajñi'''</u> is the name of a school of teachers mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ii. 4, 5) with the '''Śailanas''' and the '''Kārīradis.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सात्य-हव्य
<u>'''Sātya-havya'''</u> (‘descendant of Satyahavya’) is the patronymic of a '''[[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]]''' who is mentioned as a contemporary of '''[[अत्य्अराति जानंतपि|Atyarāti Jānaṃtapi]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 23, 9), and of '''[[देवभाग|Devabhāga]]''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (vi. 6, 2, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

सात्राजित
<u>'''Sātrājita'''</u> (‘descendant of Satrājit’) is the patronymic of '''Śatānīka.'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1665> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 21, 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 19. 21.</ref>

सात्रा-साह
<u>'''Sātrā-sāha'''</u> (‘descendant of Satrāsāha’) is the patronymic of '''Śoṇa.'''<br><br>^1 Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 16, 18.<br>==Foot Notes==

सादिन्
<u>'''Sādin'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1667> xi. 10, 24.</ref> denotes the ‘rider’ of a horse as opposed to ''a-sāda,'' ‘pedestrian.’ An ''[[अश्व|aśva]]-[[सादिन्|sādin]],'' ‘horse-rider,’ is known to the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1667> xxx. 13.</ref> The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_1667> iii. 4, 7, 1.</ref> and the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve2_1667> i. 162, 17;<br> v. 61, 3. ''Cf.'' i. 163, 9.</ref> itself contain clear references to horse-riding, while the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx5_ve2_1667> i. 2, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 3, 2, 17.</ref> refers to mounting a horse sideways. Āśvalāyana<ref name=fx6_ve2_1667> [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 9, 14.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 230, 295, 296;<br> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 358;<br> Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 177;<br> Weber, Proceedings of the Berlin Academy, 1898, 564.</ref> knows ''sādya'' as a ‘riding horse’ opposed to ''[[वह्य|vahya]],'' a ‘draught animal.’

साधारणी
<u>'''Sādhāraṇī'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1668> i. 167, 4.</ref> seems to refer not so much to an ''uxor communis,'' like Draupadī in the Epic, as Max Müller<ref name=fx2_ve2_1668> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 277.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 332;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 461;<br> Pischel and Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, xxv.</ref> suggests, but to a courtezan. 

साप्त
<u>'''Sāpta'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1669> viii. 55, 5. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 5, 552;<br> Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 266.</ref> may be a proper name, but the sense is quite uncertain.

साप्तरथ-वाहनि
<u>'''Sāptaratha-vāhani'''</u> (‘descendant of Saptarathavāhana’) is the patronymic of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[शाण्डिल्य|Śāṇḍilya]],''' in the '''Śatapatha''' [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1670> x. 1, 4, 10. 11. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 259, n.</ref>

साप्य
<u>'''Sāpya'''</u> or '''[[साय्य|Sāyya]]''' is the patronymic of '''Namī''' in the Rigveda (vi. 20, 6).<br>==Foot Notes==

साम-वेद
<u>'''Sāma-veda,'''</u> ‘the Veda of the Sāman chants,’ is the name of a collection of verses for chanting, often mentioned in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1672> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 12, 9, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 32, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 8, 3;<br> xii. 3, 4, 9;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 3;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 5, 13 (Mādhyaṃdina = i. 5, 5 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> ii. 4, 10;<br> iv. 1, 6 (= iv. 1, 2);<br> 5, 11;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 3, 7;<br> iii. 3, 1. 2;<br> 15, 7;<br> vii. 1, 2. 4;<br> 2, 1;<br> 7, 1, etc.</ref> The Sāman itself is repeatedly referred to in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1672> i. 62, 2;<br> 107, 2;<br> 164, 24, etc. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 38, 439 ''et seq.''</ref> and the triad Ṛc, [[यजुस्|Yajus]], and Sāman is common from the Atharvaveda onwards.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1672> x. 7, 14;<br> xi. 7, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxxiv. 5, etc.</ref> These texts know also the Sāma-ga, the ‘Sāman-chanter,’<ref name=fx4_ve2_1672> Rv. ii. 43, 1;<br> x. 107, 6;<br> Av. ii. 12, 4.</ref> who occurs later.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1672> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 22, 3;<br> 37, 4;<br> iii. 4, 1.</ref>

साम-श्रवस्
<u>'''Sāma-śravas'''</u> (‘famed for chants’) occurs in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1673> iii. 1, 3.</ref> According to Max Müller,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1673> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 15, 121.</ref> the word is an epithet of '''[[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]],''' but Bo7htlingk<ref name=fx3_ve2_1673> Translation, 36.</ref> takes it as the name of a pupil of that teacher.

साम-श्रवस
<u>'''Sāma-śravasa'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[सामश्रवस्|Sāmaśravas]]'''’) is the patronymic of '''[[कुषीतक|Kuṣītaka]]''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xvii. 4, 3). <br>==Foot Notes==

सामुद्रि
<u>'''Sāmudri'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[सम्उद्र|Samudra]]'''’) is the name of a mythical sage, [[अश्व|Aśva]], in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 2, 2, 14).<br>==Foot Notes==

सांमद
<u>'''Sāṃmada'''</u> (‘descendant of Saṃmada’) is the patronymic of the mythical [[मत्स्य|Matsya]] in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 4, 3, 12).<br>==Foot Notes==

साम्राज्य
<u>'''Sāmrājya.'''</u> See '''[[सम्राज्|Samrāj]]''' and '''[[राज्य|Rājya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

साय
<u>'''Sāya'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1678> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 3, 3;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 8;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 3, 2, 18.</ref> denotes ‘evening’ in the Rigveda and later, usually appearing in the adverbial form Sāyam,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1678> Rv. v. 77, 2;<br> x. 146, 4;<br> Av. iii. 12, 3;<br> iv. 11, 12;<br> viii. 6, 10, etc. ''Cf. Sāyaṃprātar,'' ‘morning and evening,’ Av. iii. 30, 7;<br> xix. 39, 2, etc.</ref> ‘in the evening.’ ''Cf.'' '''Ahar.'''

सायक
<u>'''1. Sāyaka'''</u> denotes ‘arrow’ in the '''Rigveda''' (ii. 33, 10; iii. 53, 23; x. 48, 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

सायक जान-श्रुतेय
<u>'''2. Sāyaka [[जान|Jāna]]-śruteya'''</u> (‘descendant of Janaśruta’) '''[[काण्ड्विय|Kāṇḍviya]]''' is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[जनश्रुत|Janaśruta]] [[काण्ड्विय|Kāṇḍviya]],''' in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 40, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

सायकायन
<u>'''Sāyakāyana'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[सायक|Sāyaka]]'''’) is the patronymic of '''Śyāparṇa''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1681> x. 3, 6, 10;<br> 5, 2, 1.</ref> and also of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[कौशिकायनि|Kauśikāyani]]''' in the second [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_1681> iv. 5, 27 (Mādhyaṃdina = iv. 6, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref>

साय्य
<u>'''Sāyya.'''</u> See '''[[साप्य|Sāpya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सारथि
<u>'''Sārathi'''</u> denotes the ‘charioteer’ as opposed to the warrior ('''[[सव्यष्ठा|Savyaṣṭhā]]''') in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1683> i. 55, 7;<br> 144, 3;<br> ii. 19, 6;<br> vi. 20, 5;<br> 57, 6;<br> x. 102, 6.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1683> Av. xv. 2, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 9, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 8, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 296.</ref> 

सारमेय
<u>'''Sārameya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Saramā,’ Indra's mythical dog, is applied to a dog on earth in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1684> vii. 55, 2 (unless that passage be deemed to refer to the souls of the departed).</ref> as also to the dogs of Yama.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1684> x. 14, 10.</ref>

सार्ञ्जय
<u>'''Sārñjaya'''</u> is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1685> vi. 47, 25.</ref> in a Dānastuti (‘praise of gifts’) where the word probably denotes the ‘'''[[सृञ्जय|Sṛñjaya]]''' king’ rather than a ‘descendant of [[सृञ्जय|Sṛñjaya]].’ According to the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_1685> xvi. 11, 11.</ref> he was '''[[प्रस्तोक|Prastoka]],''' mentioned, in the same hymn, but this conclusion is not very cogent. He was clearly a patron of the '''Bharadvājas.''' The same epithet belongs to '''[[सहदेव|Sahadeva]],''' ''alias'' '''Suplan.'''<br><br>^3 Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 4, 4; xii. 8, 2, 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 104, 105.

सार्प-राज्ञी
<u>'''Sārpa-rājñī'''</u> in the Pañcaviṃśa (iv. 9, 4) and the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] (xxvii. 4) Brāhmaṇas is identical with '''[[सर्पराज्ञी|Sarparājñī]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सार्व-सेनि
<u>'''Sārva-seni'''</u> (‘descendant of Sarvasena’) is the patronymic of '''[[शौचेय|Śauceya]]''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (vii. 1, 10, 3).<br>==Foot Notes==

साला-वृक
<u>'''Sālā-vṛka'''</u> is found twice in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1688> x. 73, 2;<br> 95, 15.</ref> apparently denoting the ‘hyæna’ or ‘wild dog.’ This sense also seems appropriate in the later narrative of the destruction of the '''Yatis''' by Indra,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1688> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 7, 5;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 28, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 1 (''varia lectio'').</ref> who is said to have handed them over to the Sālāvṛkas. Sālāvṛkeya<ref name=fx3_ve2_1688> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 1, 4;<br> xiii. 4, 16;<br> xiv. 11, 28;<br> xviii. 1, 9;<br> xix. 4, 7;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 185 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 123);<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, viii. 5;<br> xi. 10;<br> xxv. 6;<br> xxxvi. 7 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 465, 466);<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 1 (according to Śaṅkarānanda's recension). In Av. ii. 27, 5, Indra is alluded to as an enemy of the Sālāvṛkas.</ref> is a variant form of the same word, meaning literally ‘descendant of a [[सालावृक|Sālāvṛka]].’ The feminine is Sālāvṛkī,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1688> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxviii. 4.</ref> but in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx5_ve2_1688> vi. 2, 7, 5;<br> also in Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 8, 3;<br> Āpastamba [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 10, 17;<br> 11, 33.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 81;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 192;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 68;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 306, who decides in favour of ‘jackal.’</ref> it appears as [[सलावृकी|Salāvṛkī]]. ''Cf.'' '''[[तरक्षु|Tarakṣu]].''' 

सावयस
<u>'''Sāvayasa'''</u> (‘descendant of Savayasa’) is the patronymic of Aṣāḍha, or Āṣāḍha, in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 1, 1, 7).<br>==Foot Notes==

सा-वर्णि
<u>'''Sā-varṇi'''</u> is found as a patronymic in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1690> x. 62, 11.</ref> together with Sāvarṇya.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1690> x. 62, 9.</ref> It is clear that no man called Savarṇa ever existed, though Roth<ref name=fx3_ve2_1690> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 17.</ref> accepted that view, and that the reference is to the mythical '''Manu''' [[सावर्णि|Sāvarṇi]], the descendant of the ''sa-varṇā'' female, who, according to the legend,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1690> Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society'' 15, 179 ''et seq.''</ref> took the place of Saraṇyū.

सिंह
<u>'''Siṃha'''</u> denotes the ‘lion’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1691> i. 64, 8;<br> 95, 5;<br> iii. 2, 11;<br> 9, 4;<br> 26, 5;<br> iv. 16, 14, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1691> Av. iv. 36, 6;<br> v. 20, 1, 2;<br> 21, 6;<br> viii. 7, 15;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 21, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 10, etc.;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 9;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], 1, 2.</ref> The roaring (''nad'') of the lion is often alluded to,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1691/> and is called thundering (''stanatha'').<ref name=fx4_ve2_1691> Rv. v. 83, 3;<br> Av. v. 21, 6;<br> viii. 7, 15.</ref> He wanders about (''ku-cara'') and lives in the hills (''giri-ṣṭha''),<ref name=fx5_ve2_1691> Rv. i. 154, 2;<br> x. 160, 2.</ref> and is clearly the ‘dread wild beast that slays’ (''mṛgo bhīma upahatnuḥ'')<ref name=fx6_ve2_1691> Rv. ii. 33, 11.</ref> to which Rudra is compared. When Agni, who has entered the waters, is compared to a lion,<ref name=fx7_ve2_1691> Rv. iii. 9, 4.</ref> the reference may be to the lion's habit of springing on animals at drinking places. That a jackal should defeat the lion is spoken of as a marvel.<ref name=fx8_ve2_1691> Rv. x. 28, 4.</ref> The lion, being dangerous to men,<ref name=fx9_ve2_1691> Rv. i. 174, 3.</ref> was trapped,<ref name=fx10_ve2_1691> Rv. x. 28, 10.</ref> lain in wait for in ambush,<ref name=fx11_ve2_1691> Rv. v. 74, 4.</ref> or chased by hunting bands.<ref name=fx12_ve2_1691> Rv. v. 15, 3. ''Cf.'' Strabo, xv, 1, 31.</ref> But dogs were terrified of lions.<ref name=fx13_ve2_1691> Av. v. 36, 6.</ref> The liones (''siṃhī'') was also famous for her courage: the aid given by Indra to '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]]''' against the vast host of his enemies is compared to the defeat of a lioness by a ram ('''[[पेत्व|Petva]]''').<ref name=fx14_ve2_1691> Rv. vii. 18, 17.</ref> The gaping jaws of the lioness when attacking men are alluded to in  the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx15_ve2_1691> vi. 35, 1.</ref> The lioness is also mentioned in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx16_ve2_1691> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 2, 12, 2;<br> vi. 2, 7, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, v. 10;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 1, 21;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 8, 5.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 78, 79.</ref> See also '''Halīkṣṇa.'''

सिच्
<u>'''1. Sic'''</u> denotes the ‘border’ of a garment. The Rigveda refers to a son clutching the hem of his father's robe to attract his attention,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1692> iii. 53, 2.</ref> and to a mother's covering her son with the edge of her garment.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1692> x. 18, 11.</ref> The word also occurs later.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1692> Av. xiv. 2, 51;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 1, 18.</ref>

सिच्
<u>'''2. Sic'''</u> denotes, in the dual, the ‘wings’ of an army,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1693> Rv. x. 75, 4.</ref> or, in the plural, the ‘lines.’(**  2) Av. xi. 9, 18; 10, 20.<br><br>''Cf.'' Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 65; Geldner, ''ibid.,'' 3, 31.

सिच्
<u>'''3. Sic'''</u> seems in one passage of the Rigveda (i. 95, 7), where it is used in the dual, to denote the ‘horizon’ (meaning literally the ‘two borders’; ''i.e.,'' of heaven and of earth).<br>==Foot Notes==

सिध्मल
<u>'''Sidhmala,'''</u> ‘leprous,’ is found in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā (xxx. 17) and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 4, 14, 1) as a designation of one of the victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’). ''Cf.'' '''[[किलास|Kilāsa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सिनीवाली
<u>'''Sinīvālī'''</u> denotes the day of new moon and its presiding spirit, which, in accordance with widespread ideas concerning the connexion of the moon and vegetation, is one of fertility and growth. It occurs very frequently from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1696> ii. 32, 7, 8;<br> x. 184, 2.</ref> onwards.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1696> Av. ii. 26, 2;<br> vi. 11, 3;<br> ix. 4, 14;<br> xiv. 2, 15;<br> xix. 31, 10;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 6, 2;<br> iii. 4, 9, 1. 6;<br> v. 5, 17, 1;<br> 6, 18, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxv. 2, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 352;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 125.</ref> 

सिन्धु
<u>'''Sindhu'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1697> i. 97, 8;<br> 125, 5;<br> ii. 11, 9;<br> 25, 3, 5;<br> iii. 53, 9, etc.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1697> iii. 13, 1;<br> iv. 24, 2;<br> x. 4, 15;<br> xiii. 3, 50, etc.</ref> often means ‘stream’ merely (''cf.'' '''[[सप्त सिन्धवः|Sapta Sindhavaḥ]]'''), but it has also<ref name=fx3_ve2_1697> Rv. i. 122, 6;<br> 126, 1;<br> iv. 54, 6;<br> 55, 3;<br> v. 53, 9;<br> vii. 95, 1;<br> viii. 12, 3;<br> 25, 14;<br> 20, 25;<br> 26, 18;<br> x. 64, 9;<br> Av. xii. 1, 3;<br> xiv. 1, 43;<br> perhaps also vi. 24, 1;<br> vii. 45, 1;<br> xix. 38, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, viii. 59.</ref> the more exact sense of ‘the stream’ ''par excellence,'' ‘the Indus.’ The name is, however, rarely mentioned after the period of the Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1697> The [[सिन्धु|Sindhu]]-Sauvīras occur in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 2, 14. ''Cf.'' Bühler, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 14, 148;<br> Oldenberg, ''Buddha,'' 394, n.</ref> always then occurring in such a way as to suggest distance. The horses from the Indus (''[[सैन्धव|saindhava]]'') were famous.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1697> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 2, 15 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 1, 13 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 16, 17, 27.</ref> See '''[[सैन्धव|Saindhava]].''' ''Cf.'' also '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]].'''

सिन्धु-क्षित्
<u>'''Sindhu-kṣit'''</u> is the name of a long-banished but finally restored '''[[राजन्यर्षि|Rājanyarṣi]]''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1698> xii. 12, 6.</ref> probably quite a mythical personage.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1698> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 235, n. 3.</ref>

सिरी
<u>'''Sirī'''</u> in the Rigveda (x. 71, 9) seems to denote a ‘female weaver.’<br>==Foot Notes==

सिलाची
<u>'''Silācī'''</u> is, in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1700> v. 5, 1, 8. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 419;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 228.</ref> the name of a healing plant, also called '''[[लाक्षा|Lākṣā]].'''

सिलाञ्जाला
<u>'''Silāñjālā,'''</u> which the commentator reads as Śalāñjālā, is the name of a plant, perhaps a ‘grain creeper,’ in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1701> vi. 16, 4.</ref> The [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1701> ii. 16. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 466;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 292, 293.</ref> reads the word as Śilāñjālā. ''Cf.'' '''Silāeī.''' 

सीचापू
<u>'''Sīcāpū'''</u> in the list of victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1702> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 19, 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 25. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 94.</ref> seems to denote a kind of bird.

सीता
<u>'''Sītā,'''</u> ‘furrow,’ occurs in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1703> iv. 57, 6. 7 (the most agricultural of Rigvedic hymns, and probably late).</ref> and often later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1703> Av. xi. 3, 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 5, 4. 5;<br> 6, 2, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xx. 3, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 86, n.</ref>

सीमन्
<u>'''Sīman'''</u> denotes the ‘parting’ of the hair in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1704> ix. 8, 13.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1704> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 7, 4;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 1;<br> xv. 5, 20;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 4, 1, 14. ''Cf. sīmanta'' in Av. vi. 134, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 17, 3.</ref>

सीर
<u>'''Sīra,'''</u> ‘plough,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1705> iv. 57, 8;<br> x. 101, 3, 4.</ref> and often later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1705> Av. vi. 30, 1;<br> 91, 1;<br> viii. 9, 16, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 1, 2;<br> ii. 5, 8, 12;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 11, 4.</ref> It was large and heavy, as is shown by the fact that six oxen,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1705> Av. vi. 91, 1;<br> viii. 9, 16;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 2, 5, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 2;<br> xx. 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 2, 2, 6;<br> xiii. 8, 2, 6.</ref> or eight,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1705> Av. vi. 91, 1.</ref> or twelve,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1705> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 7, 1;<br> v. 2, 5, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 2, etc.</ref> or even twenty-four,<ref name=fx6_ve2_1705> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 2. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 244. n. 1.</ref> were used to drag it. The animals which drew the plough were oxen, which were, no doubt, yoked and harnessed with traces.<ref name=fx7_ve2_1705> '''[[वरत्रा|Varatrā]]''' is found in Rv. iv. 57, 4, and (of the ox in the '''[[मुद्गल|Mudgala]]''' story) in x. 102, 8. It may denote the fastening of the ox to the yoke rather than to the plough by traces.</ref> The ox was guided by the '''[[अष्ट्रा|Aṣṭrā]],''' or ‘goad,’ of the ploughman (''cf.'' '''[[वैश्य|Vaiśya]]''').<ref name=fx8_ve2_1705> ''Cf.'' Rv. iv. 57, 4;<br> x. 102, 8.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 236, 237.</ref> Little is known of the parts of the plough. See '''[[लाङ्गल|Lāṅgala]]''' and '''[[फाल|Phāla]].'''

सील
<u>'''Sīla,'''</u> ‘plough,’ is found in the Kapiṣṭhala Saṃhitā (xxviii. 8). <br>==Foot Notes==

सीलमावती
<u>'''Sīlamāvatī'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1707> x. 75, 8.</ref> is, according to Ludwig,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1707> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 200.</ref> the name of a river; but this is most improbable.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1707> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 429;<br> Bo7htlingk, Dictionary, ''s.v.;<br>'' Geldner, ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 195.</ref> Sāyaṇa thinks the word means ‘rich in hemp.’

सीस
<u>'''Sīsa,'''</u> ‘lead,’ occurs first in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1708> xii. 2, 1. 19 ''et seq.,'' 53.</ref> where it is mentioned as used for amulets.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1708> i. 16, 2, 4.</ref> The word is then quite common.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1708> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xviii. 13;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 12, 6, 5;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, 2, 14;<br> 4, 1, 9;<br> xii. 7, 1, 7;<br> 2, 10;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 17, 7, etc.</ref> The use of lead by the weaver as a weight is perhaps also referred to.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1708> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 80;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 9;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 4. This is the view of Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' and of Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 53. But Griffith, Translation of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, 183, n., thinks that in xix. 80 lead is referred to not as a weight, but as a charm against demons and sorcery.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 157, 158.</ref>

सु-कन्या
<u>'''Su-kanyā'''</u> is the name of '''Śaryāta's''' daughter, who married '''[[च्यवन|Cyavana]]''' according to the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1709> iv. 1, 5, 6;<br> 10, 13;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 121 ''et seq.''</ref>

सु-कपर्द
<u>'''Su-kaparda.'''</u> See '''[[कपर्द|Kaparda]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-करीर
<u>'''Su-karīra'''</u> in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (ii. 7, 5) is a misreading of ''[[सु-कुरीर|su-kurīra]].'' See '''[[कुरीर|Kurīra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-कीर्ति काक्षीवत
<u>'''Su-kīrti Kākṣīvata'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]]'''’) is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] to whom the Brāhmaṇas of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1712> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 15, 4;<br> vi. 29, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxx. 5.</ref> ascribe the authorship of a Vedic hymn.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1712> x. 131.</ref>

सु-केशिन् भारद्वाज
<u>'''Su-[[केशिन्|keśin]] Bhāradvāja'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]]'''’) is the name of a teacher in the [[प्रश्न|Praśna]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (i. 1). <br>==Foot Notes==

सु-कुरीर
<u>'''Su-kurīra.'''</u> See '''[[कुरीर|Kurīra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-ख
<u>'''Su-kha.'''</u> See '''Kha.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सुगन्धि-तेजन
<u>'''Sugandhi-tejana'''</u> in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_1716> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 8, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxv. 6.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx2_ve2_1716> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 28, 28;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 5, 2, 17;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxiv. 13, 5.</ref> denotes a kind of fragrant grass.

सु-चित्त शैलन
<u>'''Su-citta Śailana'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 14, 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-जात
<u>'''Su-jāta,'''</u> ‘well-born,’ is an epithet found applied to men in a few passages of the Rigveda. It would probably be a mistake to press the sense so as to denote ‘nobles’ as compared with the people. See '''[[सभा|Sabhā]].'''<br><br>^1 ii. 2, 11; v. 6, 2; vii. 1, 4. 15; viii. 20, 8.<br>==Foot Notes==

सुतं-भर
<u>'''Sutaṃ-bhara'''</u> is credited by the '''Anukramaṇī''' (Index) with the authorship of certain hymns of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1719> v. 11-14.</ref> The word does not occur in those hymns, but it appears as an adjective (‘carrying away Soma’) elsewhere,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1719> v. 44, 13.</ref> and may, in a second passage,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1719> ix. 6, 6.</ref> by a conjecture<ref name=fx4_ve2_1719> If ''sutaṃ-bharāya'' be read for ''sutdṃ bhárāya,'' as Roth suggests in the St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> be taken as a man's name.

सुत्वन् कैरिशि भार्गायण
<u>'''Sutvan [[कैरिशि|Kairiśi]] Bhārgāyaṇa'''</u> is, in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 28, 18), the name of a king who, being taught a spell by '''[[मैत्रेय|Maitreya]] [[कौषारव|Kauṣārava]],''' slew five kings and became great.<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-दक्षिण क्षैमि
<u>'''Su-dakṣiṇa Kṣaimi'''</u> (‘descendant of Kṣema’) is the name of a teacher in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 6, 3; 7, 1 ''et seq.;'' 8, 6). <br>==Foot Notes==

सु-दत्त पाराशर्य
<u>'''Su-datta Pārāśarya'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[पराशर|Parāśara]]'''’) is in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 41, 1; iv. 17, 1) the name of a teacher who was a pupil of '''[[जनश्रुत|Janaśruta]] [[वारक्य|Vārakya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-दामन्
<u>'''Su-dāman'''</u> is the name of a river in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xxii. 18, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-दास्
<u>'''Su-dās'''</u> is the name of the '''[[तृत्सु|Tṛtsu]]''' king who won a famous victory over the ten kings, as described in a hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1724> vii. 18. See also Rv. vii. 20, 2;<br> 25, 3;<br> 32, 10;<br> 33, 3;<br> 64, 3;<br> 83, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> At one time '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]''' was his '''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]],''' and accompanied him in his victorious raids over the '''[[विपाश्|Vipāś]]''' (Beās) and '''[[शुतुद्री|Śutudrī]]''' (Sutlej).<ref name=fx2_ve2_1724> Rv. iii. 53, 9, 11. See also '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]]''' and '''Vaṣiṣṭha.'''</ref> The Aśvins gave him a queen, '''[[सुदेवी|Sudevī]],'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1724> Rv. i. 112, 19.</ref> and also helped him on another occasion.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1724> Rv. i. 47, 9, where, however, Roth, St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 1, takes ''[[सु-दास्|su-dās]]'' as an adjective (‘worshipping well’).</ref> He appears with '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]]''' in a late hymn without hint of rivalry,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1724> Rv. vii. 19, 3.</ref> but elsewhere he seems to be referred to as defeated by '''[[पुरुकुत्स|Purukutsa]],''' Trasadasyu's father.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1724> Rv. i. 63, 7, reading ''Sudāsam'' for ''Sudāse'' with Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 174. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 112, n. 1;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 153;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 63.</ref> In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx7_ve2_1724> vii. 34, 9.</ref> he is recognized as a great king, with '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]]''' as his Puro hita, and similarly in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]],<ref name=fx8_ve2_1724> xvi. 11, 14.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 107 ''et seq.;<br>'' Weber, ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 31 ''et seq.''</ref> where his generosity to his priest is related.<br><br>His exact ancestry is a little uncertain, because he is called '''[[पैजवन|Paijavana]],''' ‘son of [[पिजवन|Pijavana]],’ as [[यास्क|Yāska]] explains the patronymic. If this explanation is correct, '''Divodāsa''' must have been his grandfather. If he was the son of Divodāsa, [[पिजवन|Pijavana]] must be understood as a more remote ancestor. The former alternative seems the more probable. ''Cf.'' '''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]], [[दाशराज्ञ|Dāśarājña]]. [[पैजवन|Paijavana]], [[भरत|Bharata]], [[सौदास|Saudāsa]].'''

सु-देव
<u>'''1. Su-deva'''</u> is, according to Ludwig,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1725> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 160.</ref> the proper name of a sacrificer in one hymn of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1725> viii. 5, 6.</ref> 

सु-देव काश्यप
<u>'''2. Su-deva Kāśyapa'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[कश्यप|Kaśyapa]]'''’) is the name of a teacher in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx1_ve2_1726> ii. 18. ''Cf.'' x. 1, 8;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 188, n.;<br> 10, 103.</ref> who set forth the expiation for lack of chastity.

सु-देवला
<u>'''Su-devalā'''</u> was the name of '''[[ऋतुपर्ण|Ṛtuparṇa]]''' as a woman according to the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xx. 12).<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-देवी
<u>'''Su-devī.'''</u> See '''Sudas.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-धन्वन् आङ्गिरस
<u>'''Su-[[धन्वन्|dhanvan]] Āṅgirasa'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[अङ्गिरस्|Aṅgiras]]'''’) is the name of a teacher in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iii. 3, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-नीथ शौचद्-रथ
<u>'''1. Su-[[नीथ|nītha]] Śaucad-ratha'''</u> (‘descendant of Śucadratha’) is the name of a man in the Rigveda (v. 79, 2). ''Cf.'' '''[[सत्यश्रवस्|Satyaśravas]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-नीथ कापटव
<u>'''2. Su-[[नीथ|nītha]] Kāpaṭava'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1731> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref>

सु-पर्ण
<u>'''1. Su-parṇa,'''</u> ‘well-winged,’ designates a large bird of prey, the ‘eagle’ or the ‘vulture,’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1732> i. 164, 20;<br> ii. 42, 2;<br> iv. 26, 4;<br> viii. 100, 8;<br> ix. 48, 3, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1732> Av. i. 24, 1;<br> ii. 27. 2;<br> 30, 3;<br> iv. 6, 3, etc.;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 5, 8, 5, etc.</ref> In the passages in which it appears as an eater of carrion<ref name=fx3_ve2_1732> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 9, 19;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka, iv. 29.</ref> it must be the vulture. The Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_1732> ii. 438 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 101).</ref> mentions an eagle which separates milk from water like the '''[[क्रुञ्च्|Kruñc]].''' In the Rigveda<ref name=fx5_ve2_1732> x. 144, 4.</ref> the [[सुपर्ण|Suparṇa]] is said to be the child of the '''[[श्येन|Śyena]],''' and is distinguished from the latter in another passage:<ref name=fx6_ve2_1732> ii. 42, 2.</ref> this led Zimmer<ref name=fx7_ve2_1732> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 88.</ref> to think that the falcon is probably meant.<ref name=fx8_ve2_1732> In the post-Vedic period [[सुपर्ण|Suparṇa]] became a mythical bird, identified with Viṣnu's vehicle, Garuḍa, who, however, is also regarded as king of the Suparṇas.</ref> The Atharvaveda alludes to its cry,<ref name=fx9_ve2_1732> ii. 30, 3.</ref> and describes it as living in the hills.<ref name=fx10_ve2_1732> v. 4, 2.</ref> 

सुपर्ण
<u>'''2. Suparṇa'''</u> is personified in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_1733> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 3, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxix. 7.</ref> as a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]].

सु-पित्र्य
<u>'''Su-pitrya,'''</u> a word occurring once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1734> x. 115, 6.</ref> is probably an adjective (‘maintaining his paternal character well’). Ludwig,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1734> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 169.</ref> however, regards it, but without any great probability, as a proper name.

सु-प्रतीत औलुण्ड्य
<u>'''Su-pratīta Auluṇḍya'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''Bṛhaspatigupta,''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1735> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref>

सुप्लन् सार्ञ्जय
<u>'''Suplan Sārñjaya'''</u> is the name of a prince of the '''Sṛñjayas''' who was taught the [[दाक्षायण|Dākṣāyaṇa]] sacrifice by '''Pratīdarśa,''' and took the name of '''[[सहदेव|Sahadeva]]''' as a token of his success.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1736> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 4, 4;<br> xii. 8, 2, 3. ''Cf.'' Lévi, ''La Doctrine du Sacrifice,'' 139;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 105, 106.</ref>

सु-बन्धु
<u>'''Su-bandhu'''</u> in the hymns of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1737> x. 59, 8;<br> 60, 7, 10.</ref> is taken by Sāyaṇa to be a proper name; but this is not certain, Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_1737> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 1.</ref> seeing in the passages only an ordinary noun meaning ‘a good friend.’ The later tradition<ref name=fx3_ve2_1737> Bṛhaddevatā, vii. 83 ''et seq.,'' with Macdonell's notes. See also '''Asamāti,''' n. 1.</ref> explains that [[सुबन्धु|Subandhu]] and his brothers, called '''Gaupāyanas,''' were priests of '''Asamāti,''' who cast them off and took two others, '''[[किरात|Kirāta]]''' and '''[[आकुलि|Ākuli]].''' By these two in pigeon form [[सुबन्धु|Subandhu]] was caused to swoon, but was revived by his three brothers, who recited certain hymns.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1737> Rv. x. 57-60.<br><br>''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 2, 420-455;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 39, 90.</ref>

सु-ब्रह्मण्य
<u>'''Su-brahmaṇya'''</u> in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_1738> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 4, 6;<br> 18, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 4, 9. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 362, 374.</ref> denotes a priest who officiates as one of the three assistants of the Udgātṛ (see '''[[ऋत्व्इज्|Ṛtvij]]'''). His office is Subrahmaṇyā.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1738> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 3, 1-7. 11, 12;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxvii. 6, etc. The priest himself is so styled, [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 1, 2;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xviii. 9, 19, etc.</ref> 

सु-भगा
<u>'''Su-bhagā,'''</u> in the vocative ''subhage,'' is a frequent form of courteous address to women from the Rigveda onwards.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1739> Rv. x. 10, 10. 12;<br> 108, 5;<br> Av. v. 5, 6;<br> vi. 30, 3, etc.</ref>

सु-भद्रिका
<u>'''Su-bhadrikā'''</u> occurs in the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) section of the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1740> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 18 (''cf.'' Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 2, 8, 3);<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 12, 20.</ref> as in some way connected with the rite. Weber<ref name=fx2_ve2_1740> ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 183, 184;<br> ''Indian Literature,'' 114, 115. ''Cf.'' Griffith, Translation of the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, 212, n.</ref> thinks that a proper name, that of the wife of the king of '''[[काम्पील|Kāmpīla]],''' is intended, but Mahīdhara<ref name=fx3_ve2_1740> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> explains the word merely as a lady with many lovers or a courtezan, a view followed by Roth.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1740> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v. subhadraka,'' 2''b;<br>'' Bo7htlingk's Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 2''a.''</ref> Since the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]]<ref name=fx5_ve2_1740> vii. 4, 19, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 9, 6.</ref> and [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]]<ref name=fx6_ve2_1740> ''[[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]],'' iv. 8.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 36, 37;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 321, 322.</ref> Saṃhitās have no [[सुभद्रिका|Subhadrikā]], but a vocative ''subhage'' (see '''[[सुभगा|Subhagā]]'''), the sense remains very doubtful.

सुमति-त्सरु
<u>'''Sumati-tsaru.'''</u> See '''[[त्सरु|Tsaru]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-मन्त्र बाभ्रव
<u>'''Su-[[मन्त्र|mantra]] Bābhrava'''</u> (‘descendant of Babhru’) '''[[गौतम|Gautama]]''' (‘descendant of '''[[गोतम|Gotama]]'''’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[शूष वाह्नेय|Śūṣa Vāhneya]] [[भारद्वाज|Bhāradvāja]],''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1742> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373.</ref>

सु-मित्र वाध्र्यस्व
<u>'''Su-[[मित्र|mitra]] Vādhryasva'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[वध्र्य्अश्व|Vadhryaśva]]'''’) is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1743> x. 69, 3. 5.</ref> where also<ref name=fx2_ve2_1743> x. 69, 1, 7, 8. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 133.</ref> the '''Sumitras,''' his family, are mentioned.

सु-मीळ्ह
<u>'''Su-mīḷha'''</u> is the name of a patron in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1744> vi. 63, 9. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 158.</ref> 

सु-मेध
<u>'''Su-medha'''</u> occurs in an obscure hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1745> x. 132, 7. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 133;<br> Griffith, ''Hymns of the Rigveda,'' 2, 579, n.</ref> either as an adjective (‘of good understanding’) or a proper name, perhaps identical with '''[[नृमेध|Nṛmedha]]''' or his brother.

सुम्न-यु
<u>'''Sumna-yu'''</u> is mentioned in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) at the end of the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka (xv. 1) as a pupil of '''Uddālaka.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-यज्ञ शाण्डिल्य
<u>'''Su-yajña Śāṇḍilya'''</u> is the name of a pupil of '''[[कंस|Kaṃsa]] [[वारक्य|Vārakya]]''' in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iv. 17, 1). Another Suyajña is a '''[[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]],''' author of the [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-यवस
<u>'''Su-yavasa'''</u> denotes a ‘good pasture’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1748> i. 42, 8;<br> vi. 28, 7;<br> vii. 18, 4, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1748> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 7, 5, 2, etc.</ref>

सुरा
<u>'''Surā'''</u> is the name of an intoxicating ‘spirituous liquor,’ often mentioned in Vedic literature. In some passages<ref name=fx1_ve2_1749> Rv. i. 116, 7;<br> x. 131, 4, 5. ''Cf.'' Av. iv. 34, 6;<br> x. 6, 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 3, 3, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 7, 3, 8.</ref> it is referred to favourably, in others with decided disapproval.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1749> Rv. vii. 86, 6;<br> viii. 2, 12;<br> 21, 14;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, i. 11, 6;<br> ii. 4, 2;<br> iv. 2, 1, etc.</ref> It is classed with the use of meat and with dicing as an evil in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1749> vi. 70, 1. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 493.</ref> and often with dicing.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1749> Rv. vii. 86, 6;<br> Av. xiv. 1, 35. 36;<br> xv. 9, 1. 2.</ref> It was, as opposed to '''Soma,''' essentially a drink of ordinary life.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1749> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 3, 2.</ref> It was the drink of men in the '''[[सभा|Sabhā]],'''<ref name=fx6_ve2_1749> See n. 4.</ref> and gave rise to broils.<ref name=fx7_ve2_1749> Rv. viii. 2, 12;<br> 21, 14. ''Cf.'' [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xiv. 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 2, etc.</ref><br><br>Its exact nature is not certain. It may have been a strong spirit prepared from fermented grains and plants, as Eggeling<ref name=fx8_ve2_1749> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 223, n. 2;<br> Caland, ''Altindisches Zauberritual,'' 21, n. 1;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 280, 281. ''Cf.'' Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xix. 1, 20-27;<br> Mahīdhara on Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 1.</ref>  holds, or, as Whitney<ref name=fx9_ve2_1749> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 207. ''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 326.</ref> thought, a kind of beer or ale. Geldner<ref name=fx10_ve2_1749> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 198.</ref> renders it ‘brandy.’ It is sometimes mentioned in connexion with '''[[मधु|Madhu]].'''<ref name=fx11_ve2_1749> Av. vi. 69, 1;<br> ix. 1, 18, 19;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 95. See Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 251, who attempts to show that [[सुरा|Surā]] and Soma were rival priestly drinks at one time, belonging to different sections of the people.</ref> It was kept in skins.<ref name=fx12_ve2_1749> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 11, 26. ''Cf.'' Rv. i. 191, 10.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 121.</ref>

सुरा-कार
<u>'''Surā-kāra,'''</u> ‘maker of '''[[सुरा|Surā]],'''’ is included in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1750> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 7, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 281, who compares Rv. i. 191, 10, which may refer to such a person.</ref>

सु-राधस्
<u>'''Su-rādhas'''</u> is the name of a man in the Rigveda (i. 100, 17). where he is mentioned with '''[[अम्बरीष|Ambarīṣa]]''' and others.<br>==Foot Notes==

सुराम
<u>'''Surāma'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1752> x. 131, 5.</ref> refers to the illness caused by drinking '''[[सुरा|Surā]]''' to excess. Indra is described as suffering from it in the Namuci legend.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1752> Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 148 ''et seq.''</ref> Later [[सुराम|Surāma]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_1752> Or Surāman. ''Cf.'' Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxi. 42;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 4;<br> iv. 12, 5. Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 245 ''et seq.,'' renders it ‘Surā mixed,’ which is doubtful.</ref> was treated as an epithet of '''Soma,''' meaning ‘delightful.’

सु-वर्ण
<u>'''Su-varṇa,'''</u> ‘beautiful coloured,’ is an epithet of gold ('''[[हिरण्य|Hiraṇya]]'''), and then comes to be used as a substantive denoting ‘gold.’<br><br>^1) [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 7, 4; 8, 9, 1, etc.<br><br>^2) Av. xv. 1, 2; [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 12, 6, 6; Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 4, 1, 8, etc.; Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 6, 6; iii. 19, 1; iv. 17, 7, etc.<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-वसन
<u>'''Su-vasana'''</u> in the Rigveda denotes a ‘splendid garment,’<ref name=fx1_ve2_1754> vi. 51, 4.</ref> and is also used adjectivally, ‘clothing well.’<ref name=fx2_ve2_1754> ix. 97, 50.</ref> Su-[[वासस्|vāsas]], ‘welldressed,’ is a common adjective.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1754> Rv. i. 124, 7;<br> iii. 8, 4;<br> x. 71, 4, etc. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 262.</ref> See '''[[वासस्|Vāsas]].''' 

सु-वास्तु
<u>'''Su-vāstu'''</u> (‘having fair dwellings’) is the name of a river in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1755> viii. 19, 37;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iv. 15.</ref> It is clearly the Soastos of Arrian<ref name=fx2_ve2_1755> ''Indica,'' iv. 11.<br><br>''Cf.'' Roth, ''[[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], Erlänterungen,'' 43;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 18;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3. 200;<br> ''Imperial Gazetteer of India,'' 23, 187.</ref> and the modern Swāt, a tributary of the '''[[कुभा|Kubhā]]''' (Kabul river) which is itself an affluent of the Indus.

सु-शारद शालङ्कायन
<u>'''Su-[[शारद|śārada]] Śālaṅkāyana'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[ऊर्जयन्त् औपमन्यव|Ūrjayant Aupamanyava]],''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1756> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref>

सु-श्रवस्
<u>'''1. Su-śravas'''</u> is the name of a man in the Rigveda (i. 53, 9) according to Sāyaṇa.<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-श्रवस्
<u>'''2. Su-śravas'''</u> is the name of the father of '''[[उपगु सौश्रवस|Upagu Sauśravasa]]''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiv. 6, 8).<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-श्रवस् कौष्य
<u>'''3. Su-śravas Kauṣya'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a contemporary of '''[[कुश्रि वाजश्रवस|Kuśri Vājaśravasa]],''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (x. 5, 5, 1 ''et seq.'').<br>==Foot Notes==

सु-श्रवस् वार्ष-गण्य
<u>'''4. Su-śravas Vārṣa-gaṇya'''</u> (‘descendant of Vṛṣagaṇa’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[प्रातर्अह्न कौहल|Prātarahna Kauhala]],''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1760> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372.</ref>

सु-षामन्
<u>'''Su-ṣāman'''</u> is the name of a man in one verse of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1761> viii. 25, 22;<br> possibly 60, 18.</ref> and probably forms part of the strange name, Varo [[सुषामन्|Suṣāman]], in other passages.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1761> viii. 23, 28;<br> 24, 28;<br> 26, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 162.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Varu.'''

सु-षोमा
<u>'''Su-ṣomā'''</u> occurs certainly as the name of a river in the Nadīstuti (‘praise of rivers’) in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1762> x. 75, 5;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 26, where it is absurdly identified with the '''Sindu''' (Indus).</ref> In two other passages it would seem to be a proper name, once masculine,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1762> viii. 7, 29.</ref> perhaps  the people, and once feminine,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1762> viii. 64, 11.</ref> though Roth<ref name=fx4_ve2_1762> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 2.</ref> sees in the word the designation of a Soma vessel. Its identification is quite uncertain, though it has been thought to be the  of Megasthenes,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1762> See Arrian, ''Indica,'' iv. 12;<br> Schwanbeck, ''Megasthenes,'' 31, where there is a various reading .<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 126 ''et seq.;<br>'' Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 32, 398, 399;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 12-14.</ref> the modern Suwan.

सु-सर्तु
<u>'''Su-sartu'''</u> is the name of a river in the [[नदी|Nadī]]-[[स्तुति|stuti]] (‘praise of rivers’) in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1763> x. 75, 6. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 14;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 200.</ref> That it was a tributary of the Indus is certain, but which one is unknown.

सु-हविस् आङ्गिरस
<u>'''Su-[[हविस्|havis]] Āṅgirasa'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[अङ्गिरस्|Aṅgiras]]'''’) is the name of the seer of a Sāman or chant in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiv. 3, 25).<br>==Foot Notes==

सू-कर
<u>'''Sū-kara'''</u> ‘wild-boar,’ has the appearance of being an onomatopoetic word (‘making the sound ''sū''’); it is more probably a very old word going back to the Indo-European period, and cognate with the Latin ''su-culus'' (‘little pig’), being transformed in sense by popular etymology.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1765> The ''sū-'' corresponding to Lat. ''sū-s,'' Gk. -''s,'' Old High German, ''sū. Cf.'' Brugmann, ''Grundriss,'' 2^2, 483.</ref> It occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1765> vii. 55, 4.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1765> Av. ii. 27, 2;<br> v. 14, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 21;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 40;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], v. 10, 2, etc. None of the passages refer to the flesh as eaten: Buddha's death was due to a meal of ''sūkaramaddava,'' which may well mean ‘tender parts of pork’ (see Fleet, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1906, 881, n.), though the Rājanighaṇṭu, vii. 85, gives ''[[सूकर|sūkara]]'' as meaning the ''Batatas edulis.''</ref> It appears once in the Atharvaveda accompanied by ''[[मृग|mṛga]],''<ref name=fx4_ve2_1765> xii. 1, 48. The use of ''[[मृग|mṛga]]'' here does not indicate that ''[[सूकर|sūkara]]'' is a new name, because the latter word elsewhere always occurs alone both in the Rigveda and later (n. 3). ''Cf.'' '''[[मृग|Mṛga]]''' above, 2, 172, n. 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 82;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 100.</ref> the combined words apparently meaning ‘wild hog,’ as opposed to '''[[वराह|Varāha]],''' ‘boar.’ 

सूक्त
<u>'''Sūkta,'''</u> ‘well uttered,’ is the regular term for a ‘hymn’ as part of the [[शस्त्र|Śastra]] in the later Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_1766> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 4, 5, 5;<br> vii. 1, 5, 4, etc.</ref> and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1766> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 33;<br> iii. 11, 9. 12-15;<br> iv. 21, 5;<br> vi. 8, 10;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1;<br> xv. 3;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 1, 18;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iv. 6;<br> xi. 16.</ref> The sense of ‘hymn’ must also be recognized in several passages of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1766> i. 42, 20;<br> 171, 1;<br> ii. 6, 2;<br> vii. 29, 3, etc.</ref>

सूची
<u>'''Sūcī,'''</u> ‘needle,’ is found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1767> ii. 32, 4.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1767> Av. xi. 10, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 33;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 9, 6, 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 18, 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 2, 10, 2. 3;<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 10;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 10, 3 (Oertel, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 228).</ref>

सूचीक
<u>'''Sūcīka'''</u> is the name of a stinging insect in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1768> i. 191, 7. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98.</ref>

सूत
<u>'''Sūta'''</u> is the name of a court official who is often mentioned with the '''Grāmaṇī.''' He is one of the eight '''Vīras''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1769> ix. 1, 4, where he follows the chief queen ('''[[महिषी|Mahiṣī]]'''), and precedes the Grāmaṇī in the list.</ref> and of the eleven '''Ratnins''' in other texts.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1769> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 4;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 5;<br> iv. 3, 8;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 3, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 9, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 1, 5.</ref> He also appears in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_1769> iii. 5, 7.</ref> among the kingmakers ('''Rājakṛt''') and in the Śatrarudriya<ref name=fx4_ve2_1769> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 5, 2, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 18. So also in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’), Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 2, 1. For other references to the [[सूत|Sūta]], see [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 18, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 4, 7;<br> xiii. 4, 2, 5;<br> 7, 1, 43;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxviii. 3;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 3, 37, 38.</ref> (‘section dealing with the hundred Rudras’) of the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]]. The commentators are agreed in seeing in him the ‘charioteer’ ('''[[सारथि|Sārathi]]''') or ‘master of the horse,’ of the king; this sense is accepted by Roth,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1769> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> by Whitney,<ref name=fx6_ve2_1769> Translation of the Atharvaveda, 62.</ref> and by Bloomfield.<ref name=fx7_ve2_1769> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 114.</ref> But the fact that the '''Saṃ-  grahītṛ,''' who occurs in several passages beside the [[सूत|Sūta]], is the ‘charioteer,’ renders this version improbable. Eggeling<ref name=fx8_ve2_1769> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 62, n. 1.</ref> thinks that he was, in the Brāhmaṇas at least, a minstrel and court poet, while Weber<ref name=fx9_ve2_1769> ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 200.</ref> considers that his name denotes him as ‘consecrated’--that is, one who has constant access to the king. In the Epic the [[सूत|Sūta]] serves as a royal herald and bard:<ref name=fx10_ve2_1769> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 254, 255.</ref> it may be that the curious words ''ahanti,''<ref name=fx11_ve2_1769> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 18. This word means ‘non-fighter’ according to Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 17, 200.</ref> ''ahantya,''<ref name=fx12_ve2_1769> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 2, 1.</ref> or ''ahantva''<ref name=fx13_ve2_1769> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 3.</ref> applied to him<ref name=fx14_ve2_1769> The last two forms appear to be equivalent in sense to ''ahanya,'' ‘not to be slain,’ ‘inviolable.’</ref> in the [[शतरुद्रिय|Śatarudriya]] denote his sacred character at once as minstrel and as herald--a combination of functions not unknown elsewhere.

सूत-वशा
<u>'''Sūta-vaśā'''</u> denotes in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1770> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 5, 4;<br> vi. 1, 3, 6;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvii. 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 4, 1, etc.</ref> a cow barren after having one calf.

सूत्र
<u>'''Sūtra'''</u> has the sense of ‘thread’ in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1771> iii. 9, 3;<br> xviii. 8, 37.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1771> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 4, 14;<br> vii. 3, 2, 13;<br> xii. 3, 4, 2;<br> 7, 2, 10;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 8, 2;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iv. 6.</ref> In the sense of a ‘book of rules’ for the guidance of sacrificers and so forth, the word occurs in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_1771> ii. 4, 10;<br> iv. 1, 6 (Mādhyaṃdina = iv. 1, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> 5, 11.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 5, 24, 25;<br> Sieg, ''Die Sagenstoffe des [[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]],'' 21.</ref>

सूद
<u>'''Sūda,'''</u> according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, means ‘well’<ref name=fx1_ve2_1772> Rv. vii. 36, 3;<br> ix. 97, 4.</ref> and the ‘mud of a dried-up pool.’<ref name=fx2_ve2_1772> Rv. x. 61, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvi. 13;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 3, 5;<br> 2, 1, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 7, 3, 21.</ref> Pischel,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1772> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 72, 73.</ref> however, shows clearly that [[सूद|Sūda]] denotes what is added to Soma to  make it fit for use, especially the warm milk, and this sense suits all the passages. Eggeling<ref name=fx4_ve2_1772> ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 43, 144.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 211.</ref> renders it ‘well,’ and Grassmann ‘sweet drink.’

सूद-दोहस्
<u>'''Sūda-dohas'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1773> viii. 69, 3.</ref> denotes ‘milking '''[[सूद|Sūda]]'''’--''i.e.,'' what is requisite to mix with Soma, according to Pischel.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1773> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 72. ''Sūdayitnu'' in Rv. x. 64, 9, may be taken in the same way, and ''sūdin'' in [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxvii. 2;<br> ''sūdya'' in [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 13, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 25, etc.</ref> According to Roth,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1773> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> it means ‘yielding milk like a well.’

सूना
<u>'''Sūnā'''</u> means, in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1774> i. 161, 10;<br> 162, 13;<br> x. 86, 18.</ref> and the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1774> Av. v. 17, 14. Crates of '''[[पलाश|Palāśa]]''' wood are mentioned in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xvii. 3, 2. 3.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 271.</ref> apparently a ‘woven (from ''sīv,'' ‘sew’) wickerwork basket’ for holding flesh.

सूनु
<u>'''Sūnu'''</u> is a common word for ‘son’ from the Rigveda onwards.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1775> Rv. i. 26, 3;<br> ii. 38, 5;<br> vi. 52, 9, etc.;<br> Av. vi. 1, 2;<br> vii. 2, 2;<br> xii. 3, 23, etc.</ref> The etymological sense seems to be ‘he who is borne,’ and then ‘the begotten.’<ref name=fx2_ve2_1775> Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandischaftsnamen,'' 453.</ref> But the use of [[सूनु|Sūnu]] in the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_1775> Usually in a figurative sense--''e.g sahasaḥ, adreḥ Sūruḥ.''</ref> is predominantly in relation to the father, and only rarely in its connexion with words for mother.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1775> v. 42, 2.</ref> Thus a father is ‘easy of access’ (''sāpāyana'') to his son (''[[सूनु|sūnu]]'');<ref name=fx5_ve2_1775> Rv. i. 1, 9.</ref> but in another passage,<ref name=fx6_ve2_1775> Rv. x. 18, 11.</ref> where the same term is applied to earth as a mother, the word used for son is '''[[पुत्र|Putra]].''' No conclusion as to matriarchy can of course be drawn from the etymology. On the relation of son and father, see '''[[पितृ|Pitṛ]].''' 

सूरि
<u>'''Sūri'''</u> is the regular word in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1776> i. 31, 7. 12;<br> 48, 24;<br> 54, 11;<br> 73, 5. 8, 9;<br> iii. 31, 14;<br> v. 42, 4;<br> 79, 6;<br> vi. 4, 8;<br> 23, 10;<br> vii. 32, 15;<br> viii. 70, 15;<br> x. 61, 22;<br> 115, 5. 7. 8.</ref> for the sacrificer, the later Yajamāna--that is, the man who pays the priests for performing the rite, and reaps the benefit of that service. The Sūris are often coupled with the '''Maghavans,'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1776/> described as heroes or warriors,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1776> i. 69, 3;<br> 73, 9;<br> 119, 3;<br> 122, 12;<br> 180, 9;<br> vii. 32, 15.</ref> and as related to the priests by their patronage<ref name=fx3_ve2_1776> i. 97, 3, 4;<br> v. 10, 6;<br> vi. 8, 7;<br> 25, 7;<br> vii. 3, 8;<br> 44, 18;<br> viii. 60, 6;<br> x. 66, 2.</ref> or as companions.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1776> v. 64, 5;<br> vii. 32, 25;<br> viii. 45, 36;<br> ix. 96, 4;<br> x. 115, 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 236.</ref>

सूर्मि
<u>'''Sūrmi'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1777> vii. 1, 3.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1777> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 5, 7, 6;<br> v. 4, 7, 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxi. 9, where it is described as ''karṇakāvatī,'' rendered by Roth as ‘provided with a handle.’</ref> according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, a kind of ‘tube’ serving as a lamp. In one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_1777> viii. 69, 12. '''Sūrmya''' in [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 9, 2, may mean ‘being in pipes or channels.’</ref> it means a ‘pipe’ for conveying water. ''Cf.'' '''[[अवत|Avata]].'''

सूर्य
<u>'''Sūrya,'''</u> the ‘sun,’ plays a great part in Vedic mythology and religion,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1778> See Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 30 ''et seq.''</ref> corresponding with the importance of the sun as a factor in the physical life of the peninsula. In the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1778> ''E.g.,'' i. 50, 6;<br> 115, 1. 3;<br> 164, 11. 13;<br> 191, 8. 9;<br> vii. 63, 1;<br> x. 37, 4;<br> 85, 9;<br> 88, 11;<br> 139, 3, etc.</ref> the sun is normally regarded as a beneficent power, a not unnatural view in a people which must apparently have issued from the cold regions of the Himālaya mountains. Its heat is, however, alluded to in some passages of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1778> Rv. vii. 34, 19;<br> ix. 107, 20.</ref> as well as referred to in the Atharvaveda and the literature of the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1778> Ehni, ''Yama,'' 134;<br> Macdonell, ''op. cit.,'' p. 31.</ref><br><br>In one myth Indra is said to have vanquished [[सूर्य|Sūrya]] and to have stolen his wheel:<ref name=fx5_ve2_1778> i. 175, 4;<br> iv. 30, 4;<br> x. 43, 5.</ref> this is possibly a reference to the  obscuration of the sun by a thunderstorm.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1778> Macdonell, ''loc. cit.''</ref> The [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx7_ve2_1778> iii. 44, 4.</ref> presents a naive conception of the course of the sun, which it regards as bright on one side only, and as returning from west to east by the same road, but with the reverse side turned towards the earth, thus at night illumining the stars in heaven.<ref name=fx8_ve2_1778> Macdonell, p. 10, who compares Rv. i. 115. 5;<br> x. 37, 3. See also Speyer, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1906, 723;<br> Thibaut, ''Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik,'' 6.</ref> In the Rigveda<ref name=fx9_ve2_1778> Rv. iv. 13, 5.</ref> wonder is expressed that the sun does not fall.<br><br>There are several references to eclipses in the Rigveda. In one passage<ref name=fx10_ve2_1778> Rv. v. 40, 5-9. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, p. 160;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 5, 2;<br> 6, 14;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxiv. 3;<br> Tilak, ''Orion,'' 159.</ref> Svarbhānu, a demon, is said to have eclipsed the sun with darkness, while '''Atri''' restores the light of the sun, a similar feat being elsewhere attributed to his family, the Atris.<ref name=fx11_ve2_1778> Av. xiii. 2, 4, 12, 36;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 3, 4, 21.</ref> In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx12_ve2_1778> Av. xix. 9, 10;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 351.</ref> '''[[राहु|Rāhu]]''' appears for the first time in connexion with the sun. Indra's defeat of [[सूर्य|Sūrya]]<ref name=fx6_ve2_1778/> may also be explained as alluding to an eclipse; in two other passages<ref name=fx13_ve2_1778> Rv. iv. 28, 2, 3;<br> v. 33, 4. In x. 27 20, ''sūro markaḥ'' means, according to Roth. St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' and Zimmer, ''loc. cit.,'' a demon of eclipse;<br> but it may also mean the ‘cleansing’ sun. Av. ii. 10, 8, clearly refers to an eclipse. See Lanman, ''Festgruss an Roth,'' 187-190.</ref> such an interpretation seems at least probable. Ludwig<ref name=fx14_ve2_1778> Proceedings of the Bohemian Academy of Sciences, May, 1885;<br> Translation of the Rigveda, 6, x.</ref> not only argues that the Rigveda knows the theory of eclipses caused by an occultation of the sun by the moon, and regards the sun as going round the earth,<ref name=fx15_ve2_1778> See Rv. iv. 28, 23;<br> v. 33, 4;<br> x. 37, 3 138, 4.</ref> but even endeavours to identify an eclipse referred to in the Rigveda with one that occurred in 1029 B.C. These views are completely refuted by Whitney.<ref name=fx16_ve2_1778> ''Proceedings of the American Oriental Society,'' October, 1885, xvii (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, lxilxvi);<br> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, lxxxii, lxxxiii;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 65, 66;<br> Thibaut, ''Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik,'' 6.</ref><br><br>The sun as a maker of time<ref name=fx17_ve2_1778> Rv. v. 81, 1.</ref> determines the year of 360 days, which is the civil year and the usual year ('''[[संवत्सर|Saṃvatsara]]''') of  Vedic literature. This solar year is divided into two halves-the Uttarāyaṇa,<ref name=fx18_ve2_1778> The form Uttarāyaṇa is later (Manu, vi. 10, etc.). [[उदग्अयन|Udagayana]] occurs in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 3, 1;<br> [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], lxvii. 4;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 1, 1;<br> Gobhila [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 1, 3;<br> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 4, etc.;<br> Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 201, 212;<br> ''[[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]],'' 107 ''et seq.;<br>'' [[यास्क|Yāska]], ''[[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],'' xiv. 10.</ref> when the sun goes north, and the [[दक्षिणायन|Dakṣiṇāyana]],<ref name=fx19_ve2_1778> The form is late (Manu, i. 67, etc.). In the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 3, the two Ayanas are equated each with three seasons--the northern course with spring, summer, and rains;<br> the southern with autumn, winter, and cool season. But this is merely an inevitable inaccuracy, since no real season begins with the winter solstice.</ref> when it goes south. There can be no doubt that these periods denote the time when the sun turns north from the winter solstice, and when it turns south from the summer solstice, for the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx20_ve2_1778> xix. 3. ''Cf.'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 3;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 1, 18 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 2, 18 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 345 ''et seq.''</ref> says so in perfectly clear language. The alternative theory is to regard the periods as those when the sun is in the north--''i.e.,'' when it is north of the equator, and when it is in the south, taking as points of departure the equinoxes, not the solstices; but this view has no support in Vedic literature, and is opposed to the fact that the equinoxes play no part in Vedic astronomical theory.<ref name=fx21_ve2_1778> Thibaut, ''Indian Antiquary,'' 24, 96;<br> ''Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematik,''  10;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 631 ''et seq.;<br>'' 49, 473 ''et seq.;<br> Nachrichten der ko7niglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Go7ttingen,'' 1909, 564, n. 1;<br> Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 1103. On the other side. see Tilak, ''Orion,'' 22-31.</ref> There are only doubtful references to the solstices in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx22_ve2_1778> See Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 279-283, who cites Rv. i. 61, 15;<br> v. 29, 5;<br> x. 171, 4;<br> 179, 2. But none of these passages are conclusive. ''Cf.'' Thibaut, ''op. cit.,'' 6.</ref><br><br>The Brāhmaṇas,<ref name=fx23_ve2_1778> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 4, 18;<br> iv. 6, 7, 12;<br> x. 6, 2, 3;<br> xi. 1, 6, 19;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 2, 13;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 28, 8.</ref> and perhaps the Rigveda,<ref name=fx24_ve2_1778> v. 47, 3;<br> ix. 25, 6;<br> 71, 2;<br> x. 55, 5;<br> 138, 4. ''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''op. cit.,'' 1, 463-466.</ref> regard the moon as entering the sun at new moon. According to Hillebrandt,<ref name=fx25_ve2_1778> ''Ibid.,'' 3, 467, 468.</ref> the Rigveda<ref name=fx26_ve2_1778> ix. 71, 9;<br> 76, 4;<br> 86, 32;<br> perhaps i. 190, 3;<br> [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]], ii. 9, 2, 12, 1. Thibaut, ''op. cit.,'' 6, considers that the meaning of the passages is merely that the moon is filled up during the bright half of the month by light emanating from the sun.</ref> recognizes that the moon shines by the borrowed light of the sun, but this seems very doubt-  ful. See also '''[[अर्यम्णः पन्था|Aryamṇaḥ Panthā]],'''<ref name=fx27_ve2_1778> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 188, finds in the Rigveda, i. 110, 2, a mention of the inclination of the ecliptic to the equator, and in x. 86, 4, a reference to the axis of the earth. ''Cf.'' Tilak, ''Orion,'' 158 ''et seq.;<br>'' Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 102, 105. These views are clearly quite wrong. The notions of the sun given in the Brāhmaṇas are all very naive and simple;<br> the distance of heaven and the sun from the earth is the height of a thousand cows one on the top of the other ([[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 8, 6), or forty-four days' journey for a horse (''ibid.,'' xxv. 10, 16), or a thousand days' journey for a horse ([[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 17, 8), or a hundred leagues (Kausītaki [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 3). They record also such facts as that the sun rises from and sets in the waters ([[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 20, 13;<br> ''of.'' [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 17;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxiv. 4, 5;<br> xxvi. 1), and that it sets in the west (''ibid.,'' xviii. 9). The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] calls the sun circular (vii. 4, 1, 17), and also fourcornered (''catuḥ-śrakti'') in xiv. 3, 1, 17, and so on. See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 358 ''et seq.''</ref> '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]],''' and '''[[सप्त सूर्याः|Sapta Sūryāḥ]].'''

सूर्य-नक्षत्र
<u>'''Sūrya-nakṣatra'''</u> is found in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1779> ii. 1, 2, 19. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 288.</ref> in a passage where Sāyaṇa takes it as denoting a '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]],''' which gives out rays of light like the sun. But the real sense (as the [[काण्व|Kāṇva]] text helps to show) is that the sacrificer may take the sun for his [[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]]--''i.e.,'' he may neglect the Nakṣatras altogether and rely on the sun.

सूर्य-चन्द्रमसा
<u>'''Sūrya-candramasā'''</u> or '''[[सूर्य|Sūrya]]-candramasau''' denotes ‘sun and moon’ as a pair of luminaries in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1780> i. 102, 2;<br> v. 51, 15;<br> x. 190, 3.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1780> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 8, 9;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vii. 12, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Naxatra,'' 2, 293;<br> ''[[ज्योतिष|Jyotiṣa]]'' 28, 50;<br> ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 112.</ref>

सृक
<u>'''Sṛka'''</u> in a couple of passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1781> i. 32, 12;<br> x. 180, 2. ''Cf. sṛkāyin, sṛkā-[[हस्त|hasta]],'' ‘bearing a lance in his hand,’ in the [[शतरुद्रिय|Śatarudriya]], [[वाजसनेय|Vājasaneya]] Saṃhitā, xvi. 21, 61, etc.</ref> denotes a weapon of Indra, perhaps a ‘lance.’

सृगाल
<u>'''Sṛgāla'''</u>, ‘jackal,’ is not found until the Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] xii. 5, 2, 5), but is common in the Epic. <br>==Foot Notes==

सृजय
<u>'''Sṛjaya'''</u> is the name of one of the victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1783> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 14, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 14;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 23. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 99.</ref> What it was is unknown: Mahīdhara on the Vājasaneyi passage calls it a kind of bird; Sāyaṇa on the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā gives the alternatives ‘black fly’ (when ''sṛjayā'' must be read), ‘white serpent,’ and ‘black buffalo.’

सृञ्जय
<u>'''Sṛñjaya'''</u> is the name of a people mentioned as early as the Rigveda. [[सृञ्जय|Sṛñjaya]] (that is, the king of this people) '''[[दैववात|Daivavāta]]''' is celebrated as victorious over the '''Turvaśas''' and the '''Vṛcīvants,'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1784> Rv. vi. 27, 7.</ref> and his sacrificial fire is referred to.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1784> Rv. iv. 15, 4.</ref> In connexion with [[दैववात|Daivavāta]] is also mentioned '''Sāhadevya Somaka,'''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1784> Rv. iv. 15, 7.</ref> no doubt another prince; for in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_1784> vii. 34, 9.</ref> we find [[सोमक साहदेव्य|Somaka Sāhadevya]] and his father, [[सहदेव|Sahadeva]] (originally '''Suplan''') [[सार्ञ्जय|Sārñjaya]], as kings who were anointed by '''[[पर्वत|Parvata]]''' and '''[[नारद|Nārada]].''' The Rigveda<ref name=fx5_ve2_1784> Rv. vi. 47, 22. 25.</ref> has also a Dānastuti (‘praise of gifts’) of '''[[प्रस्तोक|Prastoka]],'''<ref name=fx6_ve2_1784> ''Cf.'' [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta Sutra, xvi. 11, 11.</ref> a [[सृञ्जय|Sṛñjaya]], who is lauded along with '''Divodāsa.''' Moreover, '''[[वीतहव्य|Vītahavya]]'''<ref name=fx7_ve2_1784> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 212;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 105.</ref> seems to have been a [[सृञ्जय|Sṛñjaya]], though Zimmer<ref name=fx8_ve2_1784> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 132 (on ''[[वैतहव्य|vaitahavya]]'').</ref> prefers to take the derivative word, '''[[वैतहव्य|Vaitahavya]],''' not as a patronymic, but as an epithet.<br><br>It seems probable that the Sṛñjayas and the '''Tṛtsus''' were closely allied, for Divodāsa and a [[सृञ्जय|Sṛñjaya]] prince are celebrated together,<ref name=fx9_ve2_1784> ''Cf.'' also the connexion of the '''Bharad vājas''' and Divodāsa (Rv. vi. 16, 5;<br> 31, 4;<br> Hillebrandt, ''op. cit.,'' 1, 104), and their connexion with the Sṛñjayas ([[वीतहव्य|Vītahavya]] in Rv. vi. 15, 2. 3, and see vi. 27, 7, both passages that can safely be accepted as derived from the [[भरद्वाज|Bharadvāja]] family).</ref> and the Turvaśas were enemies of both.<ref name=fx10_ve2_1784> See, on the one hand, Rv. vii. 18 (Turvaśas and Tṛtsus), and, on the other, vi. 27, 7.</ref> This view is borne out by the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx11_ve2_1784> ii. 4, 4, 5.</ref> which recognizes '''[[देवभाग श्रौतर्ष|Devabhāga Śrautarṣa]]''' as [[पुरोहित|Purohita]] of the '''Kurus''' and the Sṛñjayas. <br><br>On the other hand, some disaster certainly befel the Sṛñjayas, at least the Vaitahavyas, for they are said in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx12_ve2_1784> v. 19, 1. ''Cf.'' v. 18, 10. 11.</ref> to have offended the '''Bhṛgus''' and to have ended miserably. There is, it is true, no precise confirmation of this notice, but both the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx13_ve2_1784> xii. 3.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx14_ve2_1784> vi. 6, 2, 2, 3.</ref> in independent passages, refer to the Sṛñjayas having sustained some serious loss, though the notice is in each case coupled with a ritual error, much as in the Old Testament the fate of kings depends on their devotion to Jahve or their disobedience. It is justifiable to recognize some disaster in this allusion.<br><br>The geographical position of the Sṛñjayas is uncertain. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx15_ve2_1784> ''Op. cit.,'' 1, 106.</ref> suggests that in early times they must be looked for west of the Indus with Divodāsa; he also mentions, though he does not definitely adopt, the suggestion of Brunnhofer that the Sṛñjayas are to be compared with the <ref name=fx16_ve2_1784> Herodotus has the form  and , Strabo and Arrian. The Avestic is ''zrayaṅk,'' Old Persian ''daraya.'' The Indian ''s'' is curious if the words are parallel (see, however, Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 25, 11;<br> Oldenberg, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1909, 1098).</ref> of the Greeks, and to be located in Drangiana. Zimmer<ref name=fx17_ve2_1784> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 132, 133;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 232. This is a guess from Rv. i. 100, where [[सहदेव|Sahadeva]] occurs and the '''[[सिन्धु|Sindhu]]''' is mentioned.</ref> is inclined to locate them on the upper Indus; but it is difficult to decide definitely in favour of any particular location. They may well have been a good deal farther east than the Indus, since their allies, the Tṛtsus, were in the '''[[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]],''' and were certainly absorbed in the Kurus.<br><br>Of the history of this clan we have one notice.<ref name=fx18_ve2_1784> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 9, 3, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> They expelled '''[[दुष्टरीतु|Duṣṭarītu]] [[पौंसायन|Pauṃsāyana]],''' one of their kings, from the hereditary monarchy--of ten generations--and also drove out '''[[रेवोत्तरस्|Revottaras]] [[पाटव|Pāṭava]] [[चाक्र|Cākra]] [[स्थपति|Sthapati]],''' probably his minister, who, however, succeeded in effecting the restoration of the king, despite the opposition of the Kuru prince, '''[[बल्हिक|Balhika]] Prātīpya.''' Very probably this Kuru prince may have been at the bottom of the movement which led to the expulsion of the king and his minister. But the restoration of the king can  hardly be regarded, in accordance with Bloomfield's view,<ref name=fx19_ve2_1784> ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 433. So also Zimmer, ''op. cit.,'' 132.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 208;<br> 3, 472;<br> 18, 237;<br> ''Episches im vedischen Ritual,'' 31;<br> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 153;<br> Oldenberg, ''Buddha'' 405.</ref> as a defeat of the Sṛñjayas.

सृणी¤
<u>'''Sṛṇī¤'''</u> is found certainly in one,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1785> i. 58, 4, where ''sṛṇyā,'' according to Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 116, n. 1, and to Pischel, ''ibid.,'' 2, 111, stands for ''sṛṇyābhiḥ,'' and, as an adjective agreeing with ''juhūbhiḥ,'' means ‘sickle-shaped sacrificial ladles.’ But this is very doubtful.</ref> and probably also in two other<ref name=fx2_ve2_1785> x. 101, 3 ([[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 28);<br> 106, 6 (''ibid.,'' xiii. 5). It is certain in Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 2, 2, 5.</ref> passages of the Rigveda. The sense appears to be ‘sickle.’ In one other passage [[सृण्य|Sṛṇya]] is coupled with ''jetā:''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1785> iv. 20, 5.</ref> the sense is doubtful, Roth<ref name=fx4_ve2_1785> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 48, 111.</ref> conjecturing ''cetā,'' and Oldenberg<ref name=fx5_ve2_1785> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 284.</ref> pointing out that ''chettā'' is also possible. Hopkins<ref name=fx6_ve2_1785> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 86, n.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 238: Oldenberg, ''op. cit.,'' 1, 58.</ref> thinks that a ‘hook’ is here meant.

सृण्य
<u>'''Sṛṇya.'''</u> See '''Sṛṇī.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सृबिन्द
<u>'''Sṛbinda'''</u> is the name of a foe of Indra<ref name=fx1_ve2_1787> ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 162.</ref> in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1787> viii. 32, 2.</ref> The word may denote a real foe, since it has no obvious '''Āryan''' derivation.

सृमर
<u>'''Sṛmara'''</u> is the name of an unknown animal at the '''[[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]]''' (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1788> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhita, v. 5, 16, 1 (according to Sāyaṇa = ''camara'');<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 20;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 39 (where '''Mahīdhara''' identifies it with the '''[[गवय|Gavaya]]''').</ref> 

सेतु
<u>'''Setu'''</u> appears in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1789> ix. 41, 2.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1789> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 2, 2, 1;<br> vi. 1, 4, 9;<br> 5, 3, 3;<br> vii. 5, 8, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxviii. 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 35;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 2, 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 2, 10, 1;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 4, 24;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], viii. 4, 1. 2, etc.</ref> to denote merely a raised bank for crossing inundated land,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1789> Max Müller, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 1, 130, n. 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 257.</ref> a ‘causeway,’ such as are common all the world over. This sense explains best the later meaning of ‘boundary.’ The word in Vedic literature is probably always metaphorical.

सेना
<u>'''Senā'''</u> denotes primarily a ‘missile,’ a sense found in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1790> Rv. i. 66, 7;<br> 116, 1 (''[[सेना|senā]]-jū,'' ‘swift as an arrow’);<br> 143, 5;<br> 186, 9;<br> ii. 33, 11;<br> v. 30, 9;<br> vii. 3, 4;<br> viii. 75, 7;<br> x. 23, 1.</ref> and the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1790> viii. 8, 7;<br> xi. 10, 4.</ref> and then a ‘host’ or ‘army,’ which is its normal meaning.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1790> Rv. i. 33, 6;<br> vii. 25, 1;<br> ix. 96, 1;<br> x. 103, 1. 4. 7;<br> 142, 4;<br> 156, 2;<br> Av. iii. 1, 1;<br> 19, 6;<br> iv. 19, 2;<br> v. 21, 9, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' von Bradke, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 46, 456;<br> Bloomfield, ''ibid.,'' 48, 549, 550;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 231, n. 2, denies that [[सेना|Senā]] ever means ‘missile,’ and compares ''exercitus effusus, agmen effusum.''</ref> See '''[[संग्राम|Saṃgrāma]].'''

सेना-नी
<u>'''Senā-nī,'''</u> ‘leader of an army,’ is the title of the royal ‘general.’ He is mentioned in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1791> vii. 20, 5;<br> ix. 96, 1;<br> x. 84, 2.</ref> where also<ref name=fx2_ve2_1791> x. 34, 12 (the gambling hymn).</ref> the word is used metaphorically. He is also referred to in the [[शतरुद्रिय|Śatarudriya]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_1791> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 17;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 11;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 2, 1.</ref> as well as elsewhere in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās and Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1791> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xv. 15;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 9;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 8, 10;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 6, 1, 21.</ref> He is one of the '''Ratnins''' of the king.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1791> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 9, 1;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 7, 3, 4;<br> Maitrayaṇ Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 5;<br> iv. 3, 8;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xv. 4;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 1, 1.</ref> Presumably he was appointed by the king, not by the people, to command in war when the king became too important to lead every little fray in person. In the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx6_ve2_1791> viii. 23, 10.</ref> this official is called [[सेना|Senā]]-pati. 

सेलग
<u>'''Selaga'''</u> in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_1792> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 1, 5;<br> viii. 11, 8;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 3, 10.</ref> appears to denote ‘robber.’ See '''[[सैलग|Sailaga]].'''

सेहु
<u>'''Sehu'''</u> occurs in a comparison in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1793> vii. 76, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 54;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 441.</ref> where it must denote a very sapless (''arasa'') substance.

सैतव
<u>'''Saitava,'''</u> ‘descendant of Setu,’ is the name of a teacher in the first two Vaṃśas (list of teachers) in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1794> ii. 5, 21;<br> iv. 5, 27 Mādhyaṃdina;<br> ii. 6, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref> He is described as a pupil of '''[[पाराशर्य|Pārāśarya]]''' or of '''[[पाराशर्यायण|Pārāśaryāyaṇa]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1794> iv. 6, 2 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]].</ref>

सैन्धव
<u>'''Saindhava,'''</u> ‘coming from the Indus,’ is a term applied to water in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1795> vii. 4, 13, 1.</ref> to '''[[गुग्गुलु|Guggulu]]''' in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1795> xix. 38, 2.</ref> to a horse in the Śatapatha, [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_1795> xi. 5, 5, 12;<br> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 2, 13 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 1, 13 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> and to salt in the same text.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1795> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 4, 12 (''ºkhilya'');<br> iv. 5, 13 (''ºghana'').</ref>

सैर्य
<u>'''Sairya'''</u> is the name in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1796> i. 191, 3. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 72.</ref> of some species of grass infested by insects.

सैलग
<u>'''Sailaga'''</u> is found in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_1797> xxx. 18.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1797> iii. 4, 16, 1;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, xii. 23 (also spelt Śailaga)<br><br>''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 367, n. 4.</ref> as the name of one of the victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’). ‘Robber’ seems to be the sense of this word, as of '''[[सेलग|Selaga]].''' 

सोभरि
<u>'''Sobhari'''</u> is the name of a [[ऋषि|Ṛṣi]] frequently mentioned in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1798> viii. 5, 26;<br> 19, 2;<br> 20, 19;<br> 22, 2.</ref> The family is also referred to,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1798> Rv. viii. 19, 32;<br> 20, 8.</ref> and a father, Sobharī.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1798> Rv. viii. 22, 15. ''Cf.'' viii. 103, 14;<br> Av. xviii. 3, 15.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 105;<br> Oldenberg, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 42, 217.</ref>

सोम
<u>'''Soma'''</u> was the famous plant which was used for the preparation of the libation of Soma made at the Vedic sacrifice. Its importance is sufficiently shown by the fact that the whole of the ninth Maṇḍala of the Rigveda, and six hymns in other Maṇḍalas, are devoted to its praise.<br><br>Nevertheless, little is actually known of the plant. Its twigs or shoots are described as brown (''[[बभ्रु|babhru]]''),<ref name=fx1_ve2_1799> The word is not actually found applied to the plant itself;<br> but the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 5, 3, prescribes ''arjunāni,'' plants of this indefinite colour, as a substitute for Soma, if '''Pūtīkas''' cannot be obtained.</ref> ruddy (''aruṇa''),<ref name=fx2_ve2_1799> Rv. vii. 98, 1;<br> x. 94, 3;<br> 144, 5. ''Cf.'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 5, 10, 1 ''et seq.''</ref> of tawny (''hari'').<ref name=fx3_ve2_1799> Rv. ix. 92, 1. The Soma cow, with which Soma was purchased, is called ''[[बभ्रु|babhru]]'' or ''aruṇā,'' Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 1, 15;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 7, 5, etc.</ref> Possibly its twigs hang down if the epithet '''[[नैचाशाख|Naicāśākha]]'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_1799> Rv. iii. 53, 14. ''Cf.'' '''[[नैचाशाख|Naicāśākha]].'''</ref> refers to the plant as Hillebrandt<ref name=fx5_ve2_1799> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 14-18;<br> 2, 241-245.</ref> thinks. The shoot is called ''[[अंशु|aṃśu]],''<ref name=fx6_ve2_1799> Rv. i. 168, 3 iii. 48, 2, etc.</ref> while the plant as a whole is called ''andhas,''<ref name=fx7_ve2_1799> Rv. i. 28, 7;<br> iii. 48, 1;<br> iv. 16, 1, etc.</ref> which also denotes the juice.<ref name=fx8_ve2_1799> ii. 14, 1;<br> 19, 1;<br> 35, 1. etc.</ref> ''[[पर्वन्|Parvan]]''<ref name=fx9_ve2_1799> Rv. i. 9, 1. ''Cf. [[परुस्|parus]],'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7, 13;<br> Vaitāna [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], 24.</ref> is the stem. ''Kṣip,''<ref name=fx10_ve2_1799> Rv. ix. 79, 4. ''Cf.,'' however, Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 70.</ref> ‘finger,’ is used as a designation of the shoots, which may therefore have resembled fingers in shape; ''[[वक्षणा|vakṣaṇā]]''<ref name=fx11_ve2_1799> Rv. viii. 1, 17.</ref> and ''[[वाण|vāṇa]]''<ref name=fx12_ve2_1799> Rv. iv. 24, 9;<br> ix. 50, 1. But these passages are both very doubtful. ''Cf.'' '''[[वाण|Vāṇa]].''' The husk left after the pressing is called ''andhas'' (ix. 86, 44;<br> ''vavri'' (ix. 69, 9), ''tvac'' (ix. 86, 44;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7, 13, 1), ''śarīva'' (''ibid.,'' 2), ''[[शर्य|śarya]]'' (ix. 68, 2), ''[[तान्व|tānva]]'' (ix. 78, 1).</ref> also seem to have the sense of the shoot. There is some slight. evidence to suggest that the stem was not round, but angular.<ref name=fx13_ve2_1799> ''Cf. pṛṣṭhya'' in Rv. iv. 20, 4;<br> Hille brandt, 1, 54, 55.</ref>  The plant grew on the mountains,<ref name=fx14_ve2_1799> Rv. i. 93, 6;<br> iii. 48, 2;<br> v. 36, 2;<br> 43, 4;<br> 85, 2;<br> ix. 18, 1;<br> 46, 1;<br> 71, 4;<br> 82, 3;<br> Av. iii. 21, 10. So in the Avesta, Yasna, x. 4, etc.</ref> that of '''Müjavant''' being specially renowned.<br><br>These notices are inadequate to identify the plant. It has been held<ref name=fx15_ve2_1799> Lassen, ''Indische Alterthumskunde,'' 1^2, 931;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 261 ''et seq. Cf.'' Haug, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Brahmaṇa,'' 2, 489;<br> Max Müller, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 9, liv.</ref> to be the ''Sarcostemma viminale'' or the ''Asclepias acida (= Sarcostemma brevistigma).'' Roth<ref name=fx16_ve2_1799> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 35, 680 ''et seq. Cf.'' also 38, 134 ''et seq.''</ref> held that the ''Sarcostemma acidum'' more nearly met the requirements of the case. Watt<ref name=fx17_ve2_1799> See Hillebrandt, 1, 7 ''et seq.''</ref> suggested the Afghan grape as the real Soma, and Rice<ref name=fx18_ve2_1799> ''Ibid.,'' 10.</ref> thought a sugar-cane might be meant, while Max Müller and Rājendralāla [[मित्र|Mitra]] suggested that the juice was used as an ingredient in a kind of beer--''i.e.,'' that the Soma plant was a species of hop. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx19_ve2_1799> ''Ibid.,'' 12. The dispute between Max Müller, Roth, J. G. Baker, W. T. Thiselton Dyer, Charles G. Leland, and A. Houtum-Schindler, as to the identity of the plant, is reprinted in Max Müller's ''Biographies of Words,'' 222 ''et seq.,'' and reviewed by Hillebrandt. See also Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, xxiv. ''et seq.,'' who thinks that the traditional identification is not far wrong. Caland, ''Altindisches Zauberritual,'' 188, gives it as ''Sarcostemma acidum.''</ref> considers that neither hops nor the grape can explain the references to Soma. It is very probable that the plant cannot now be identified.<ref name=fx20_ve2_1799> The original Soma plant was, doubtless, identical with the Haoma of the Avesta. On the plant from which the present Parsis of Kermān and Yezd obtain their Hūm juice, and which they regard as identical with the Avestic Haoma, see Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, xxiv ''et seq.''</ref><br><br>In the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]]<ref name=fx21_ve2_1799> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 3, 1, 1 ''et seq.;<br>'' Hillebrandt, 1, 89 ''et seq.''</ref> the plant is purchased ere it is pressed. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx22_ve2_1799> ''Ibid.,'' 70.</ref> considers that the sale must be assumed for the Rigveda. It grew on a mountain, and could not be obtained by ordinary people: perhaps some special tribe or prince owned it, like the '''Kīkaṭas.'''<ref name=fx23_ve2_1799> Rv. iii. 53, 14.</ref> As it stands, the ritual performance is clearly an acquisition of the Soma from the Gandharvas (represented by a [[शूद्र|Śūdra]]), a ritual imitation of the action which may have been one of the sources of the drama. Owing to the difficulty of obtaining the real plant from a great  distance, several substitutes were allowed in the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] period.<ref name=fx24_ve2_1799> See Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 5, 10, 1-6, and ''cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, xxvii;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ix. 5, 3.</ref><br><br>The plant was prepared for use by being pounded with stones or in a mortar. The former was the normal method of procedure, appearing in the Rigveda as the usual one. The stones are called ''grāvan''<ref name=fx25_ve2_1799> i. 83, 6;<br> 135, 7, etc.</ref> or ''adri,''<ref name=fx26_ve2_1799> i. 130, 2;<br> 135, 5;<br> 137, 1, etc. ''Adri'' is used oftener with the verb ''su,'' ‘press,’ than ''grāvan,'' which is more personally conceived, and so appears with ''vad,'' ‘speak,’ and so forth;<br> Hillebrandt, 1, 153, n. 1.</ref> and were, of course, held in the hands.<ref name=fx27_ve2_1799> Rv. v. 45, 7;<br> ix. 11, 5;<br> x. 76, 2, etc.</ref> The plant was laid on boards one beside the other ('''Adhiṣavana'''), and, according at least to the later ritual,<ref name=fx28_ve2_1799> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 4, 28;<br> that ''ākhara,'' Rv. x. 94, 5, denotes this is uncertain.</ref> a hole was dug below, so that the pounding of the plant by means of the stones resulted in a loud noise, doubtless a prophylactic against demoniac influences.<br><br>The plant was placed on a skin and on the Vedi<ref name=fx29_ve2_1799> Rv. v. 31, 12.</ref> --which was no longer done in the later ritual--'''[[धिषणा|Dhiṣaṇā]]''' in some passages denoting the Vedi.<ref name=fx30_ve2_1799> Rv. i. 109, 3;<br> iii. 2, 1;<br> vi. 11, 3, etc.</ref><br><br>Sometimes the mortar and pestle were used in place of the stones.<ref name=fx31_ve2_1799> Rv. i. 28. The pestle is ''[[मन्था|manthā]],'' the mortar ''[[उलूखल|ulūkhala]];<br>'' in x. 101, 11, ''[[वनस्पति|vanaspati]]'' and ''vana'' may have the same senses respectively.</ref> This use, though Iranian, was apparently not common in Vedic times.

चमू
<u>'''Camū'''</u> denotes the vessel used for the offering to the god,<ref name=fx32_ve2_1800> Not the pressing boards, which are unknown in the Rigveda. ''Cf.'' Rv. ix. 99, 8;<br> x. 91, 15, etc.</ref> '''[[कलश|Kalaśa]]''' and '''[[चमस|Camasa]]''' those used for the priests to drink from. Sometimes<ref name=fx33_ve2_1800> Rv. i. 28, 9;<br> iv. 18, 3;<br> vi. 57, 2, etc.;<br> Hillebrandt, 1, 170, 173.</ref> the [[चमू|Camū]] denotes the mortar and pestle. Perhaps the vessel was so called because of its mortar-like shape.<br><br>The skin on which the shoots were placed was called '''Tvac,'''<ref name=fx34_ve2_1800> Rv. ix. 65, 25;<br> 66, 29;<br> 70, 7;<br> 79, 4, etc.</ref> or twice ''go'' (‘cow-hide’).<ref name=fx35_ve2_1800> Rv. x. 94, 9;<br> 116, 4.</ref> '''[[कोश|Kośa]],'''<ref name=fx36_ve2_1800> Rv. vii. 101, 4;<br> viii. 20, 8, etc. It denotes the larger vessel from which the Soma is poured into the Kalaśas, or cups.</ref> Sadhastha,<ref name=fx37_ve2_1800> Rv. iii. 62, 15;<br> ix. 1, 2;<br> 17, 8, etc.</ref> '''Dru,'''<ref name=fx38_ve2_1800> Rv. ix. 1, 2;<br> 65, 6;<br> 98, 2;<br> in x. 101, 10, ''dru'' = mortar.</ref>  '''Vana,'''<ref name=fx39_ve2_1800> Rv. ii. 14, 9;<br> ix. 66, 9, etc. The word can mean both the vessel into which the Soma was poured after preparation, and the vessel from which it was offered to the gods.</ref> '''[[द्रोण|Droṇa]],'''<ref name=fx40_ve2_1800> Rv. ix. 15, 7;<br> 33, 2, etc. The word, having no definite sense, can denote any of the vessels. The ''[[चमू|camū]],'' on the other hand, was the cup for the gods, the ''[[कलश|kalaśa]]'' that for the priests (later it was also used as = ''[[कोश|kośa]],'' when ''[[चमस|camasa]]'' had replaced ''[[कलश|kalaśa]]'' as cup for the priests;<br> Hillebrandt, 1, 187).</ref> are all terms used for Soma vessels, while '''[[स्रुव|Sruva]]'''<ref name=fx41_ve2_1800> Rv. i. 116, 24. ''Cf.'' also '''[[अमत्र|Amatra]]''' and '''[[खारी|Khārī]].'''</ref> denotes the ‘ladle.’<br><br>Apparently the plant was sometimes steeped in water to increase its yield of juice.<ref name=fx42_ve2_1800> This process is technically called ''āpyāyana,'' ‘causing to swell.’ ''Cf.'' Rv. ix. 74, 9;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 5. The exact nature and extent of this process is quite uncertain;<br> Hillebrandt,(**  193-195;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 26, xxvi.</ref><br><br>It is not possible to describe exactly the details of the process of pressing the Soma as practised in the Rigveda. It was certainly purified by being pressed through a sieve<ref name=fx43_ve2_1800> Whether the later practice of purification by means of shoots held in the hands was known to the Rigveda is uncertain, since ii. 14, 8;<br> ix. 71, 3, are quite indecisive. For the various terms used to designate the sieve, see '''[[पवित्र|Pavitra]].'''</ref> ('''[[पवित्र|Pavitra]]'''). The Soma was then used unmixed (''[[शुक्र|śukra]],''<ref name=fx44_ve2_1800> Rv. i. 137, 1;<br> iii. 32, 2;<br> viii. 2, 10, etc.</ref> ''śuci'')<ref name=fx45_ve2_1800> Rv. i. 5, 5;<br> 30, 2;<br> viii. 2, 9, etc.</ref> for Indra and '''Vāyu,''' but the '''Kaṇvas''' seem to have dropped this usage.<ref name=fx46_ve2_1800> ''Cf.'' Rv. viii. 2, 5. 9. 10, 28, etc. The Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 7, 4, disapproves of the unmixed Soma. Possibly Hillebrandt, 1, 207, 208, may be right in thinking that the Kāṇvas had to lay special stress on the use of the mixtures, because they used a plant which was deficient in the true Soma character.</ref> The juice is described as brown (''[[बभ्रु|babhru]]''),<ref name=fx47_ve2_1800> Rv. ix. 33, 2;<br> 63, 4. 6.</ref> tawny (''hari''),<ref name=fx48_ve2_1800> Rv. ix. 3, 9;<br> 7, 6;<br> 65, 8. 12. 25, etc.</ref> or ruddy (''aruṇa''),<ref name=fx49_ve2_1800> Rv. ix. 40, 2;<br> 45, 3;<br> ''aruṣa,'' ix. 61, 21;<br> ''śoṇa,'' ix. 97, 13.</ref> and as having a fragrant smell,<ref name=fx50_ve2_1800> ix. 97, 19;<br> 107, 2.</ref> at least as a rule.<ref name=fx51_ve2_1800> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 3, 6. This passage has been relied on by Eggeling, ''op. cit.,'' 26, xxv, as a confirmation of the later description, in a medical work, of the plant as illsmelling. But this plant may have been a different one from that used in Vedic times. The smell may have been due to a substitute being used, or to the genuine plant, brought from a distance, being old and withered.</ref><br><br>Soma was mixed with milk ('''[[गवाशिर्|Gavāśir]]'''),<ref name=fx52_ve2_1800> Hillebrandt, 1, 219-222.</ref> curd or sour milk ('''[[दध्य्आशिर्|Dadhyāśir]]'''),<ref name=fx53_ve2_1800> ''Ibid.,'' 221.</ref> or grain ('''[[यवाशिर्|Yavāśir]]''').<ref name=fx54_ve2_1800> ''Ibid.,'' 222 ''et seq.''</ref> The admixtures are  alluded to with various figurative expressions, as '''Atka,''' ‘armour’;<ref name=fx55_ve2_1800> Rv. ix. 69, 4.</ref> '''[[वस्त्र|Vastra]]'''<ref name=fx56_ve2_1800> ix. 8, 6.</ref> or '''[[वासस्|Vāsas]],'''<ref name=fx57_ve2_1800> ix. 69, 5.</ref> ‘garment’; '''[[अभिश्री|Abhiśrī]],'''<ref name=fx58_ve2_1800> ix. 79, 5;<br> 86, 27.</ref> ‘admixture’; ''rūpa,''<ref name=fx59_ve2_1800> Av. ix. 25, 4.</ref> ‘beauty’; ''[[श्री|śrī]],''<ref name=fx60_ve2_1800> Rv. iv. 41, 8;<br> ix. 16, 6.</ref> ‘splendour’; ''rasa,''<ref name=fx61_ve2_1800> Rv. iii. 48, 1;<br> vi. 47, 1;<br> ix. 97, 14. See also '''[[सूद|Sūda]].'''</ref> ‘flavour’; ''prayas,''<ref name=fx62_ve2_1800> Rv. iii. 30, 1;<br> ix. 46, 3;<br> 66, 23.</ref> ‘dainty’; and perhaps ''nabhas,''<ref name=fx63_ve2_1800> Rv. ix. 83, 5;<br> 97, 21, etc.</ref> ‘fragrance.’ The adjective ''tīvra''<ref name=fx64_ve2_1800> Rv. i. 23, 1;<br> ii. 41, 14;<br> v. 37, 4;<br> vi. 47, 1, etc.</ref> denotes the ‘pungent’ flavour of Soma when so mixed. The Soma shoots, after the juice has been pressed out, are denoted by ''ṛjīṣa,'' ‘residue.’<ref name=fx65_ve2_1800> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 8, 5;<br> Av. ix. 6, 16, etc.;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 72;<br> citation in [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 12, etc. ''Ṛjīṣa'' as an adjective occurs in Rv. i. 32, 6, and ''ṛjīṣin'' in the Rigveda means, according to Hillebrandt, 1, 236, 237, generally ‘one to whom the Soma shoots belong.’ ''Soma tiroahnya'' is ‘Soma pressed the day before yesterday.’</ref><br><br>It seems probable that in some cases honey was mixed with Soma: perhaps the ''[[कोश|kośa]] [[मधु|madhu]]-ścut,'' ‘the pail distilling sweetness,’ was used for the mixing.<ref name=fx66_ve2_1800> Rv. ix. 103, 3. ''Cf.'' ix. 17, 8;<br> ix. 86, 48;<br> 97, 11;<br> 109, 20.</ref> It seems doubtful if [[सुरा|Surā]] was ever so mixed.<ref name=fx67_ve2_1800> See '''[[सुराम|Surāma]].''' ''Cf.'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 12, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxi. 42, and ''[[सुरा|surā]]-somā, ibid.,'' xxi. 60.</ref><br><br>There were three pressings a day of Soma, as opposed to the two of the Avesta.<ref name=fx68_ve2_1800> Yasna, x. 2.</ref> The evening pressing was specially connected with the Ṛbhus, the midday with Indra, the morning with Agni, but the ritual shows that many other gods also had their share.<ref name=fx69_ve2_1800> Hillebrandt, 1, 257 ''et seq.''</ref> The drinker of Soma and the nondrinker are sharply discriminated in the texts.<ref name=fx70_ve2_1800> Rv. i. 110, 7;<br> ii. 30, 7;<br> v. 34, 3. 5;<br> iv. 17, 17;<br> 25, 6. 7;<br> v. 37, 3;<br> vi. 41, 4;<br> vii. 26, 1, etc. There were also rivalries with other Soma sacrifices, Rv. ii. 18, 3;<br> viii. 33, 14;<br> 66, 12, and especially vii. 33, 2, where the Vasiṣṛhas take away Indra from '''Pāśadyumna Vāyata's''' Soma sacrifice to '''Sudās'.''' Many famous Soma offerers are mentioned: '''Atri,''' v. 51, 8;<br> 72, 1;<br> viii. 42, 5;<br> '''[[शार्यात|Śāryāta]],''' i. 51, 12;<br> iii. 51, 7;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vii. 35;<br> '''Śīṣṭas,''' viii. 53, 4, etc.;<br> '''[[तुर्वश|Turvaśa]] Yadu,''' viii. 45, 27;<br> '''[[संवर्त|Saṃvarta]] [[कृश|Kṛśa]],''' viii. 54, 2;<br> '''[[नीपातिथि|Nīpātithi]], [[मेध्यातिथि|Medhyātithi]], [[पुष्टिगु|Puṣṭigu]], [[श्रुष्टिगु|Śruṣṭigu]]''', viii. 51, 1, etc. The ritual lays stress on the need of continuity in Soma-drinking in a family: [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 5, 5 ''et seq.;<br>'' Maitrāvaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 5, etc.</ref> Localities where Soma was consumed were '''[[आर्जीक|Ārjīka]], [[पस्त्यावन्त्|Pastyāvant]], [[शर्यणावन्त्|Śaryaṇāvant]], [[सुषोमा|Suṣomā]],''' the territory of the '''[[पञ्चजनाः|Pañcajanāḥ]]''' or ‘five  peoples,’ and so on.<ref name=fx71_ve2_1800> See ''s.v.;<br>'' Hillebrandt, 1, 125-143. It is possible that Soma may have grown on the mountains to the north of '''[[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]],''' whatever may have been its original home, on which ''cf.'' Roth, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 38, 134 ''et seq.''</ref> The effects of Soma in exhilarating and exciting the drinkers are often alluded to.<ref name=fx72_ve2_1800> See Rv. viii. 48. It was equally prized in Avestic times. It is, however, seldom spoken of as giving the priests pleasure: Rv. i. 91, 13;<br> viii. 2, 12;<br> x. 167, 3. There are many references to sickness caused by it (Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 13 etc.). The [[सौत्रामणी|Sautrāmaṇī]] was a rite designed to expiate the ill caused by vomiting Soma as Indra had done: [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 2, 5, 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 4, 9;<br> xii. 7, 1, 11. The name of the rite is already found in Av. vii. 3, 2, and the rite itself is no doubt older (see also '''[[विषूचिका|Viṣūcikā]]'''). This fact tells in favour of the traditional identification of the plant, for the medical passage quoted by Max Müller refers to its producing vomiting. See also Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 275;<br> Rv. i. 91, 13;<br> 118, 3;<br> viii. 2, 12;<br> 17, 6;<br> 48, 12. Perhaps '''[[वम्र|Vamra]]''' in i. 112, 15, got his name thence.</ref><br><br>It is difficult to decide if Soma was ever a popular, as opposed to a hieratic drink. The evidence for its actual popularity is very slight,<ref name=fx73_ve2_1800> Rv. viii. 69, 8-10. ''Cf.'' viii. 31, 5;<br> i. 28, 5;<br> Hillebrandt, 1, 143-147. The evidence is not decisive;<br> the ordinary Soma sacrifice was clearly a sacrifice of rich patrons.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 272280;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 1-266;<br> 2, 209 ''et seq.;<br>'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 104 ''et seq.''</ref> and not decisive.

सोम प्राति-वेश्य
<u>'''2. Soma Prāti-veśya'''</u> (‘descendant of Prativeśya’) is the name of a teacher, a pupil of [[प्रतिवेश्य|Prativeśya]], in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) at the end of the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka (xv. 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

सोमक साह-देव्य
<u>'''Somaka Sāha-devya'''</u> (‘descendant of Sahadeva’) is the name of a king of the '''Sṛnjayas''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1802> iv. 15, 7-10.</ref> He is mentioned in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1802> vii. 34, 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 154;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 105.</ref> as having '''[[पर्वत|Parvata]]''' and '''[[नारद|Nārada]]''' as his priests.

सोम-दक्ष कौश्रेय
<u>'''Soma-dakṣa Kauśreya'''</u> (‘descendant of '''Kuśri'''’) is the name of a teacher in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1803> xx. 8;<br> xxi. 9, where Somarakṣa Kośreya is read by the Chambers MS. in xx. 8, and Kośreya in xxi. 9.</ref> and the Maitrāyaṇī<ref name=fx2_ve2_1803> iii. 2, 7.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 3, 472, 473.</ref> Saṃhitās. 

सोमपि-त्सरु
<u>'''Somapi-tsaru.'''</u> See '''[[त्सरु|Tsaru]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सोम-शुष्म सात्य-यज्ञि
<u>'''Soma-śuṣma Sātya-yajñi'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[सत्ययज्ञ|Satyayajña]]'''’) is the name in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xi. 6, 2, 1. 3) of a travelling Brahmin who met '''[[जनक|Janaka]]''' of '''[[विदेह|Videha]].''' He may be identical with the man of the same name with the additional patronymic '''[[प्राचीनयोग्य|Prācīnayogya]]''' (‘descendant of Prācīnayoga’), who is mentioned as a pupil of [[सत्ययज्ञ|Satyayajña]] in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 40, 2).<br>==Foot Notes==

सोम-शुष्मन् वाज-रत्नायन
<u>'''Soma-śuṣman [[वाज|Vāja]]-ratnāyana'''</u> (‘descendant of Vājaratna’) is the name in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 21, 5) of the priest who consecrated '''Śatānīka.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सौकरायण
<u>'''Saukarāyaṇa'''</u> is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[काषायण|Kāṣāyaṇa]]'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1807> iv. 6, 2. ([[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> or '''[[त्रैवणि|Traivaṇi]],'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1807> iv. 5, 27 (Mādhyaṃdina)</ref> in the second [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].

सौ-जात आराढि
<u>'''Sau-jāta Ārāḍhi'''</u> is the name of a teacher in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 22, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

सौत्रामणी
<u>'''Sautrāmaṇī.'''</u> See '''Soma.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सौ-दन्ति
<u>'''Sau-danti'''</u> (‘descendant of Sudanta’) occurs in the plural in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xiv. 3, 13), apparently as the name of priests who were contemporaries of '''[[विश्वामित्र|Viśvāmitra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

सौदास
<u>'''Saudāsa'''</u> in the plural designates the ‘descendants of '''[[सुदास्|Sudās]],'''’ who are referred to in the Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1811> ii. 390 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 18, 47). The story must have appeared in the Śāṭyāyanaka also. ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 159, n. 3.</ref> as having cast '''[[शक्ति|Śakti]],''' the son of '''[[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]],''' into the fire. Other texts<ref name=fx2_ve2_1811> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 7, 1;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 8;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 7, 3. See also Caland, ''Über das rituelle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 20.</ref> relate  that [[वसिष्ठ|Vasiṣṭha]], his son being slain, desired to avenge himself on the Saudāsas, and eventually succeeded. Geldner<ref name=fx3_ve2_1811> ''Loc. cit.''</ref> sees a reference to the story in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1811> iii. 53, 22.</ref> but without cause.

सौ-द्युम्नि
<u>'''Sau-dyumni'''</u> (‘descendant of Sudyumna’) is the patronymic of king '''[[भरत|Bharata]] [[दौःषन्ति|Dauḥṣanti]]''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 5, 4, 12).<br>==Foot Notes==

सौ-बल
<u>'''Sau-bala,'''</u> ‘descendant of Subala,’ is the name of a pupil of '''[[सर्पि वात्सि|Sarpi Vātsi]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vi. 24, 16).<br>==Foot Notes==

सौभर
<u>'''Saubhara,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[सोभरि|Sobhari]],’ is the patronymic of '''Pathin''' in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1814> ii. 5, 22 (Mādhyaṃdina = ii. 6, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]);<br> iv. 5, 28 (Mādhyaṃdina = iv. 6, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref>

सौमाप
<u>'''Saumāpa'''</u> ‘descendant of Somāpa,’ is the patronymic of the two '''Mānutantavyas,''' teachers in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1815> xiii. 5, 3, 2, where Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 44, 392, has Saumapa.</ref>

सौमापि
<u>'''Saumāpi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Somāpa,’ is the patronymic of a teacher called '''Priyavrata''' in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka (xv. 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

सौमायन
<u>'''Saumāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Soma,’ is the patronymic of '''Budha''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xxiv. 18, 6).<br>==Foot Notes==

सौम्य
<u>'''Saumya'''</u> is a term of affectionate address (‘my dear’) in the Upaniṣads.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1818> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 1, 3;<br> 2, 13 (''varia lectia, somya'');<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 4, 4 ''et seq.''</ref>

सौ-यवसि
<u>'''Sau-yavasi,'''</u> ‘descendant of [[सुयवस|Suyavasa]],’ is the patronymic of '''Ajīgarta.'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1819> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Bṛāhmaṇa, vii. 15, 6;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xv. 19, 29.</ref> 

सौरी
<u>'''Saurī'''</u> is given by Zimmer<ref name=fx1_ve2_1820> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 99.</ref> as the name of an unknown animal at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1820> v. 5, 16, 1 = Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 33 = Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 14.</ref> But this is an error: ''[[सौरी|saurī]]'' means ‘dedicated to the sun.’

सौ-वर्चनस
<u>'''Sau-varcanasa'''</u> is the patronymic of '''Saṃśravas''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (i. 7, 2, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

सौ-श्रवस
<u>'''Sau-śravasa,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[सुश्रवस्|Suśravas]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''Upagu''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1822> xiv. 6, 8.</ref> and the '''[[कण्व|Kaṇva]]''' Sauśravasas are mentioned in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1822> xiii. 12 (''Indische Studien,'' 3, 474).</ref>

सौ-श्रोमतेय
<u>'''Sau-śromateya,'''</u> ‘descendant of Suśromatā,’ is the metronymic of '''Aṣāḍhi''' in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1823> vi. 2, 1, 37. ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 171, n. 1.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''Āṣādhi.'''

सौ-षद्मन
<u>'''Sau-ṣadmana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Suṣadman,’ is the patronymic of '''Viśvantara''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (vii. 27, 1; 34, 7).<br>==Foot Notes==

स्कन्ध्या
<u>'''Skandhyā,'''</u> fem. plur., is used in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1825> vi. 25, 3. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 472, 473.</ref> of a disease ‘of the shoulders,’ probably tumours of some kind.

स्तनयित्नु
<u>'''Stanayitnu,'''</u> sing. and plur., denotes ‘thunder’ from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1826> v. 83, 6.</ref> onwards.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1826> Av. i. 13, 1;<br> iv. 15, 11;<br> vii. 11, 1, etc.</ref>

स्तम्ब
<u>'''Stamba'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1827> viii. 6, 14.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1827> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 6, 4, 1 (of '''[[दर्भ|Darbha]]''');<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 7, 17, 3;<br> iii. 2, 2, 4;<br> 3, 3, 4;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 23, 9, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘tuft of grass,’ or more generally a ‘bunch’ or ‘cluster.’ 

स्तम्भ
<u>'''Stambha,'''</u> ‘pillar,’ is found in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1828> xxx. 9;<br> xxxi. 1.</ref> and often in the Sūtras. Earlier Skambha<ref name=fx2_ve2_1828> Rv. i. 34, 2;<br> iv. 13, 5, etc.</ref> is used, but only metaphorically.

स्तरी
<u>'''Starī'''</u> denotes a ‘barren cow’ in the Rigveda (i. 101, 3; 116, 22; 117, 20, etc.).<br>==Foot Notes==

स्ति
<u>'''Sti.'''</u> See '''[[उपस्ति|Upasti]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

स्ति-पा
<u>'''Sti-pā.'''</u> See '''[[उपस्ति|Upasti]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

स्तुका
<u>'''Stukā'''</u> denotes a ‘tuft’ of hair or wool in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1832> ix. 97, 17.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1832> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxv. 6;<br> Av. vii. 74, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 1, 13, etc.</ref>

स्तुति
<u>'''Stuti'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1833> i. 84, 2;<br> vi. 34, 1;<br> x. 31, 5.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1833> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 5, 2, 39</ref> denotes a ‘song of praise.’

स्तुप
<u>'''Stupa'''</u> means ‘tuft of hair’ in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā (ii. 2; xxv. 2) and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (i. 3, 3, 5; iii. 5, 3, 4). See '''[[स्तुका|Stukā]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

स्तूप
<u>'''Stūpa'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1835> vii. 2, 1. ''Cf.'' i. 24, 7.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1835> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 3, 6, 5;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 4, 4.</ref> denotes the ‘top-knot’ of hair as designating the upper part of the head.

स्तृ
<u>'''Stṛ'''</u> (used in the instrumental plural only) denotes the ‘stars’ of heaven.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1836> i. 68, 5;<br> 166, 11;<br> ii. 2, 5;<br> 34, 2;<br> iv. 7, 3;<br> vi. 49, 3. 12. In i. 87, 1, it seems to denote a ‘star-like spot’ on the forehead of a cow or bull, but this is uncertain. ''Cf.'' Grassmann, ''Wo7rterbuch, s.v.;<br>'' above, 1, 233.</ref> 

स्तेग
<u>'''Stega'''</u> in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās<ref name=fx1_ve2_1837> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 7, 11, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxv. 1.</ref> seems to denote a species of ‘worm.’ The word occurs in the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1837> x. 31, 9 = Av. xviii. 1, 39. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 98.</ref> also, where its sense is unknown, but may possibly be ‘ploughshare.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_1837> Weber, Proceedings of the Berlin Academy, 1895, 833. ''Cf.'' Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 824.</ref>

स्तेन
<u>'''Stena'''</u> is a common word for ‘thief’ from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1838> ii. 23, 16;<br> 28, 10;<br> 42, 3, etc.</ref> onwards.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1838> Av. iv. 3, 4, 5;<br> 36, 7;<br> xix. 47, 6;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 30, 11, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 178 ''et seq.''</ref> See '''[[तस्कर|Taskara]].'''

स्तेय
<u>'''Steya'''</u> denotes ‘theft’ in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1839> xi. 8, 20;<br> xiv. 1, 57.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1839> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vi. 27;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iii. 1. ''Cf. [[स्तेय|steya]]-kṛt,'' ‘thief,’ in Rv. vii. 104, 10.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[धर्म|Dharma]].'''

स्तोतृ
<u>'''Stotṛ'''</u> denotes ‘praiser’ or ‘panegyrist’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1840> i. 11, 3;<br> 38, 4;<br> iii. 18, 5;<br> vi. 34, 3, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1840> Av. vi. 2, 1;<br> xix. 48, 4.</ref> The word often<ref name=fx3_ve2_1840> Rv. i. 124, 10;<br> ii. 1, 16;<br> v. 64, 1;<br> vii. 7, 7;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], vii. 2.</ref> occurs in connexion with patrons, the '''Maghavan''' or '''[[सूरि|Sūri]].'''

स्तोत्र
<u>'''Stotra'''</u> denotes the ‘song’ of the Udgātṛ and his assistant priests (see '''[[ऋत्व्इज्|Ṛtvij]]'''), just as '''[[शस्त्र|Śastra]]''' denotes the ‘recitation’ of the '''[[होतृ|Hotṛ]]''' and his assistants. The word has this technical sense quite frequently in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1841> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 2, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxix. 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 37, 4;<br> iii. 46, 8;<br> iv. 12, 6;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 7;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 1, 7;<br> viii. 1, 3, 4, etc. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 353, and Caland and Henry, ''L'Agniṣṭoma,'' where the Stotras for that sacrifice are given at length.</ref> 

स्तोम
<u>'''Stoma'''</u> denotes ‘song of praise’ in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1842> i. 114, 9;<br> iii. 5, 2;<br> 58, 1, etc.</ref> Later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1842> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 2, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ix. 33;<br> x. 10, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 9, 229, 276;<br> 10, 355;<br> Hillebrandt, Rituallitteratur, 101.</ref> the term has the technical sense of the typical forms in which the '''Stotras''' are chanted.

स्त्री
<u>'''Strī'''</u> is the ordinary word in poetry and prose for ‘woman,’ without special reference to her as a wife or as a maiden. '''[[नारी|Nārī]]''' has the same sense, but disappears in later prose, while '''Gnā''' refers only to the wives of the gods, and '''Yoṣit,''' with its cognate words, denotes the young woman as ripe for marriage.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1843> ''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtsehaftsnamen,'' 417.</ref> In the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1843> Rv. i. 164, 16;<br> v. 61, 8, etc. So also often later--''e.g.,'' Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 7, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 8, 2.</ref> [[स्त्री|Strī]] stands opposed to '''[[पुमांस्|Pumāṃs]],''' ‘man,’ and once to ''[[वृषन्|vṛṣan]],'' ‘male person’; not until the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_1843> xii. 2, 39. ''Cf.'' [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 22, 1.</ref> does it mean ‘wife’ as opposed to '''Pati,''' ‘husband,’ and even in the Sūtras it is sharply opposed to '''[[जाया|Jāyā]].'''<br><br>In Vedic India by far the greater part of a woman's life was taken up in her marriage and marital relations (see Pati and '''[[मातृ|Mātṛ]]'''). There is no trace in the Rigveda of the seclusion of women, which was practically complete in all but the earliest Epic:<ref name=fx4_ve2_1843> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 349, 350.</ref> the maiden may be assumed to have grown up in her father's house, enjoying free intercourse with the youth of the village, and sharing in the work of the house. Education<ref name=fx5_ve2_1843> ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''op. cit.,'' 351, 352. See '''[[गार्गी वाचक्नवी|Gārgī Vācaknavī]]''' and others enumerated in the Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 4, 4;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 118, 119.</ref> was not denied to them, at any rate in certain cases, for we hear in the Upaniṣads of women who could take no unimportant part in disputations on philosophical topics. Moreover, women were taught to dance and sing, which were unmanly accomplishments.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1843> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 6, 5, Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 7, 3;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 4, 3-6.</ref><br><br>Of the exact legal position of daughters the notices are few and meagre. The Rigveda,<ref name=fx7_ve2_1843> i. 124, 7. ''Cf.'' Av. i. 14, 2;<br> 17, 1;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 328;<br> Hopkins, ''op. cit.,'' 341, and see '''[[स्याल|Syāla]], [[पुत्रिका|Putrikā]].'''</ref> however, shows that in the place  of a father the brother was looked to for aid, and that brotherless maidens were apt to be ruined, though religious terrors were believed to await the man who took advantage of their defencelessness.<ref name=fx8_ve2_1843> Rv. iv. 5, 5.</ref> Moreover, women could not take an inheritance,<ref name=fx9_ve2_1843> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 8, 2;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 6, 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 4, 2, 13;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 4.</ref> and were not independent persons in the eyes of the law, whether married or not. Presumably before marriage they lived on their parents or brothers, and after that on their husbands, while in the event of their husbands predeceasing them, their relatives took the property, burdened with the necessity of maintaining the wife.<ref name=fx10_ve2_1843> ''Cf.'' the Attic , Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1912, 427.</ref> Their earnings would be appropriated by their nearest relative--usually father or brother-in the few cases in which unmarried women could earn anything, as in the case of courtezans.

स्थ-पति
<u>'''Stha-pati'''</u> is the name of a royal official mentioned in the Atharvaveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1844> ii. 32, 4;<br> v. 23, 11 (of the chief of the worms in both cases).</ref> and often later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1844> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 5, 2, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xvii. 12;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 9, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xvi. 19;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 11, 6. 7;<br> xxiv. 18, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 4, 17, etc.</ref> '''[[रेवोत्तरस्|Revottaras]] [[चाक्र|Cākra]]''' was the [[स्थपति|Sthapati]] of the exiled '''[[दुष्टरीतु|Duṣṭarītu]] [[पौंसायन|Pauṃsāyana]],''' a king of the '''Sṛñjayas,''' and succeeded in restoring him to his royal dignity.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1844> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 8, 1, 17;<br> 9, 3, 1 ''et seq.'' [[स्थपति|Sthapati]] here is part, as it were, of the name of the man.</ref> The exact sense of the term is not certain: ‘governor’<ref name=fx4_ve2_1844> In the Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 1, 12;<br> Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], ix. 14, 12, is found [[निषाद|Niṣāda]]-[[स्थपति|sthapati]];<br> perhaps ‘governor of '''Niṣādas.'''’ But it may also mean (''cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 207, n.) a [[निषाद|Niṣāda]] as a [[स्थपति|Sthapati]];<br> thus, little can be deduced from this passage in particular. Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 41, 111, renders it ‘governor.’ ''Cf.'' also St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' and '''[[औपोदिति|Aupoditi]].'''</ref> is possible, but perhaps ‘chief judge’<ref name=fx5_ve2_1844> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 10, 13, n. 3;<br> 13, 203;<br> 17, 200;<br> 18, 260;<br> ''Über den [[राजसूय|Rājasūya]],'' 15, n. 6;<br> ''Über den [[वाजपेय|Vājapeya]],'' 9, 10. ''Cf.'' Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxii. 5, 28;<br> 11, 11;<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 7, 11;<br> Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xxii. 7, 6.</ref> is more likely; as in the case of the early English judges, his functions may have been both executive and judicial. He is inferior in position to the king's brother.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1844> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 4, 4, 17.</ref> 

स्थविर
<u>'''Sthavira,'''</u> literally ‘elder,’ is used as a sort of epithet of several men; [[स्थविर|Sthavira]] '''[[शाकल्य|Śākalya]]''' occurs in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx1_ve2_1845> iii. 2, 1. 6.</ref> and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1845> vii. 16;<br> viii. 1. 11.</ref> and [[स्थविर|Sthavira]] '''[[जातूकर्ण्य|Jātūkarṇya]]''' in the [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_1845> xxvi. 5.</ref> ''Cf.'' the names '''Hrasva''' and '''Dīrgha.'''

स्थागर
<u>'''Sthāgara'''</u> in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1846> ii. 3, 10, 2;<br> Apastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiv. 15, 2.</ref> is applied to an ornament (''alaṃkāra'') meaning ‘made of the fragrant substance Sthagara,’ which elsewhere<ref name=fx2_ve2_1846> See Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 198;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 311, n. 2;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 5, 265.</ref> appears as Sthakara.

स्थाणु
<u>'''Sthāṇu'''</u> in the '''Rigveda'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1847> x. 40, 13.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1847> Av. x. 4, 1;<br> xiv. 2, 48;<br> xix. 49, 10, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘stump’ or ‘post’ of wood.

स्थातृ
<u>'''Sthātṛ'''</u> (‘he who stands’) in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1848> i. 33, 5;<br> 181, 3;<br> iii. 45, 2, etc.</ref> denotes the ‘driver’ of horses or a car.

स्था-पत्य
<u>'''Sthā-patya'''</u> denotes in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (xvii. 11, 6. 7) the ‘rank or status of a '''[[स्थपति|Sthapati]].'''’<br>==Foot Notes==

स्थाली
<u>'''Sthālī'''</u> denotes a ‘cooking pot,’ usually of earthenware, in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1850> viii. 6, 17.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1850> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 10, 5;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 27. 86;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 11, 8, etc. ''[[स्थाली|Sthālī]]-pāka,'' a dish of rice or barley boiled in milk, is mentioned in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vi. 4, 18;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xi. 6, etc.</ref>

स्थिरक गार्ग्य
<u>'''Sthiraka Gārgya'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[गर्ग|Garga]]'''’) is the name of a teacher in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1851> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 373.</ref>

स्थिवि
<u>'''Sthivi'''</u> occurs once (used in the plural) in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1852> x. 68, 3.</ref> probably meaning ‘bushel.’ The word is also found once in the adjective ''sthivimant,''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1852> Rv. x. 27, 15. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 238.</ref> ‘provided with bushels.’ 

स्थूणा
<u>'''Sthūṇā'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1853> i. 59, 1;<br> v. 45, 2;<br> 62, 7;<br> viii. 17, 14;<br> x. 18, 13 (of the grave).</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1853> Av. iii. 12, 6 (of the '''[[वंश|Vaṃśa]],''' ‘beam,’ being placed on the pillar);<br> xiv. 1, 63;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiv. 1, 3, 7;<br> 3, 1, 22, etc.;<br> ''[[स्थूणा|sthūṇā]]-rāja,'' ‘main pillar,’ iii. 1, 1, 11;<br> 5, 1, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 153.</ref> denotes the ‘pillar’ or ‘post’ of a house.

स्थूरि
<u>'''Sthūri'''</u> has in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1854> x. 131, 3.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1854> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 2, 4;<br> iii. 8, 21, 3;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 13, 12;<br> xviii. 9, 7;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 30, 6;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 3, 3, 9, etc.</ref> the sense of ‘drawn by one animal’ instead of the usual two (see '''[[रथ|Ratha]]'''), and always with an implication of inferiority.

स्थैरकायण
<u>'''Sthairakāyaṇa,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Sthiraka,'''’ is the patronymic of '''Mitravarcas''' in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1855> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 372 (where the word is spelt with ''n'').</ref>

स्थौलाष्ठीवि
<u>'''Sthaulāṣṭhīvi,'''</u> ‘descendant of Sthūlāṣṭhīva,’ is the patronymic of a grammarian in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]] (vii. 14; x. 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

स्नातक
<u>'''Snātaka,'''</u> the designation of the student ‘who has taken the bath,’ marking the termination of his studentship under a religious teacher, occurs in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xii. 1, 1, 10), and repeatedly in the Sūtras. ''Cf.'' '''Brahmacārin.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

स्नावन्य
<u>'''1. Snāvanya,'''</u> used in the plural, denotes particular parts of the body of a horse in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (v. 7, 23, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

स्नावन्य
<u>'''2. Snāvanya'''</u> appears to be the name of a people in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1859> ii. 5 (in a [[मन्त्र|Mantra]]). ''Cf.'' Caland, ''Über das rituelle [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] des [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],'' 35.</ref>

स्नुषा
<u>'''Snuṣā'''</u> denotes the ‘daughter-in-law’ in relation primarily to her father-in-law, but also to her mother-in-law. In the latter sense the word appears in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1860> x. 86, 13.</ref> in the epithet ''su-[[स्नुषा|snuṣā]],''  ‘having a good daughter-in-law,’ used of Vṛṣākapāyī, while in the former it occurs in several passages, where the daughterin-law's respect for her father-in-law is mentioned,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1860> Av. viii. 6, 24;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 22, 7;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 4, 6, 12.</ref> a respect which spirituous liquor alone causes to be violated.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1860> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 2;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xii. 12 (''Indische Studien,'' 5, 260).<br><br>''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 414, 415.</ref> See also '''[[श्वशुर|Śvaśura]]''' and '''Pati.'''

स्पन्दन
<u>'''Spandana'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1861> iii. 53, 19.</ref> denotes a certain tree. Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1861> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Aufrecht, ''Rigveda,'' 2, vi;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 63.</ref> however, reads ''[[स्यन्दन|syandana]],'' ‘chariot.’

स्पर्शु
<u>'''Sparśu'''</u> is apparently the name of a western people in the [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xxi. 13).<br>==Foot Notes==

स्पश्
<u>'''Spaś.'''</u> See '''[[राजन्|Rājan]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

स्फूर्जक
<u>'''Sphūrjaka'''</u> denotes a tree (''Diospyros embryopteris'') mentioned in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 8, 1, 16).<br>==Foot Notes==

स्मद्-इभ
<u>'''Smad-ibha'''</u> is found once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1865> x. 49, 4.</ref> where Roth<ref name=fx2_ve2_1865> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 380;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 291, n. 5.</ref> takes the word as perhaps the name of an enemy of '''[[कुत्स|Kutsa]].''' ''Cf.'' '''Ibha.'''

स्यन्दन
<u>'''Syandana,'''</u> ‘chariot,’ is found in the earlier literature only, if at all, in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1866> iii. 53, 19, according to Roth. A wood called [[स्यन्दन|Syandana]] seems to be meant in the [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], viii. 15.</ref> where '''[[स्पन्दन|Spandana]]''' is the received reading. 

स्याल
<u>'''Syāla,'''</u> a word occurring in only one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1867> i. 109, 2.</ref> appears to denote the brother of a man's wife, who is regarded as willing to protect her, and so secure a marriage for her.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1867> So Sāyaṇa on Rv., ''loc. cit.''<br><br>''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 517;<br> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 79.</ref>

स्यूम-गभस्ति
<u>'''Syūma-gabhasti.'''</u> See '''[[गभस्ति|Gabhasti]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

स्यूम-गृभ्
<u>'''Syūma-gṛbh,'''</u> used of a horse in the Rigveda (vi. 36, 2) seems to mean ‘grasping the bit between his teeth,’ as a horse does when anxious to break away from control.<br>==Foot Notes==

स्यूमन्
<u>'''Syūman'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1870> iii. 61, 4.</ref> denotes, according to Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1870> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.''</ref> the strap fastening the door of a house, the Homeric.

स्यूम-रश्मि
<u>'''Syūma-raśmi'''</u> is the name of a protégé of the Aśvins in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1871> i. 112 16;<br> viii. 52, 2. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 150, 163.</ref>

स्रक्ति
<u>'''Srakti'''</u> is found in the description of the '''[[दाशराज्ञ|Dāśarājña]]''' in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1872> vii. 18, 17.</ref> where Hopkins<ref name=fx2_ve2_1872> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 15, 264, n.</ref> thinks the sense of ‘spears’ essential.

स्रज्
<u>'''Sraj,'''</u> ‘garland,’ is mentioned in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1873> iv. 38, 6;<br> v. 53, 4;<br> viii. 47, 15;<br> 56, 3.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1873> Av. i. 14, 1 (where it means a ‘cluster of flowers’ from a tree);<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvi. 4, 1;<br> xviii. 3, 2;<br> 7, 6;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xiii. 5, 4, 2, etc.</ref> as often worn by men when anxious to appear handsome, as at a wedding and so on. The Aśvins are described as ‘lotuswreathed’ (''[[पुष्कर|puṣkara]]-sraj'').<ref name=fx3_ve2_1873> Rv. x. 184, 3. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 265.</ref> 

स्राक्त्य
<u>'''Srāktya'''</u> is an adjective describing an amulet ('''[[मणि|Maṇi]]''') in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1874> viii. 5, 4. 7. 8. ''Cf.'' ii. 11.</ref> According to Weber,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1874> ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 164.</ref> it designates a crystal (literally ‘many-cornered’). The commentators,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1874> See Bloomfield, ''American Journal of Philology,'' 7, 477;<br> ''Hymns of the Athar vaveda,'' 577.</ref> however, agree in explaining the word to mean ‘derived from the Sraktya’--''i.e.,'' from the Tilaka tree (''Clerodendrum phlomoides'').

स्रुच्
<u>'''Sruc'''</u> denotes a ‘large wooden sacrificial ladle’ (used for pouring clarified butter on the fire) in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1875> i. 84, 18;<br> 110, 6;<br> 144, 1, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1875> Av. v. 27, 5;<br> vi. 114, 3;<br> ix. 6, 17, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' for its shape, etc., Max Müller, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 9, xli, lxxx;<br> Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 67;<br> 26, 20, 23.</ref> It is of the length of an arm, with a bowl of the size of a hand and a beaklike spout.

स्रुव
<u>'''Sruva,'''</u> as opposed to '''Sruc,''' denotes in the ritual literature<ref name=fx1_ve2_1876> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 11, 10, etc.</ref> a small ladle used to convey the offering ('''[[आज्य|Ājya]]''') from the cookingpot ('''[[स्थाली|Sthālī]]''') to the large ladle ('''[[जुहू|Juhū]]'''). In the Rigveda,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1876> i. 116, 24;<br> 121, 6, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Max Müller, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 9, viii;<br> Caland and Henry, ''L'Agniṣṭoma'' xliv;<br> Plate I., No. 9;<br> Plate II., No. 11 Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 12, 68;<br> 26, 20.</ref> however, it was clearly used for the actual Soma libation.

स्रेक-पर्ण
<u>'''Sreka-parṇa'''</u> in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_1877> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 6, 6, 3;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 15.</ref> seems to mean ‘like the oleander leaf.’

स्वज
<u>'''Svaja'''</u> in the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1878> iii. 27, 4;<br> v. 14, 10;<br> vi. 56, 2;<br> x. 4, 10, 15, 17;<br> xii. 3, 58.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1878> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 10, 2;<br> 14, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 26, 3.</ref> denotes the ‘viper.’ The word is explained by the commentators as ''sva-ja,'' ‘self-  born,’ but Roth,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1878> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.,'' gives the alternative ''vivipara.''</ref> Weber,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1878> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, 2, 89, n.</ref> and Zimmer<ref name=fx5_ve2_1878> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 95.</ref> prefer to derive it from the root ''svaj,'' ‘clasp,’ ‘encircle.’ In the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā<ref name=fx6_ve2_1878> iii. 9, 3.</ref> the '''[[हरिण|Hariṇa]]''' is said to kill the viper.

स्वधिति
<u>'''1. Svadhiti'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1879> i. 162, 9. 18. 20.</ref> denotes the ‘axe’ or ‘knife’ used for dissecting the sacrificial horse. In all the other passages in that Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve2_1879> ii. 39, 7;<br> iii. 2, 10;<br> 8, 6, 11;<br> v. 7, 8;<br> vii. 3, 9;<br> viii. 102, 19;<br> x. 89, 7. ''Cf.'' n. 8.</ref> the sense of ‘axe’ for cutting wood is adequate; reference is made in one place<ref name=fx3_ve2_1879> ii. 39, 7.</ref> to sharpening the axe on the whetstone (''kṣṇotra''). In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx4_ve2_1879> vi. 141, 2. ''Cf.'' [[मन्त्र|Mantra]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 8, 7;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 386, 387;<br> Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 159, who is inclined to compare '''[[परशु|Paraśu]]''' in Rv. iii. 53, 22.</ref> the term seems once to denote the copper (''[[लोहित|lohita]]'')<ref name=fx5_ve2_1879> Geldner, ''loc. cit.,'' understands this word to mean ‘red-hot.’</ref> knife used to mark the ears of cattle; the carpenter's knife or axe is also twice referred to there.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1879> ix. 4, 6 (probably so to be taken);<br> xii. 3, 33. In xviii. 2, 35, the sense is quite different. See Whitney, ''op. cit.,'' 845.</ref> Later the word means ‘axe’ generally.<ref name=fx7_ve2_1879> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 3, 3, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ii. 15 (the slaughteringknife);<br> v. 43 (the axe to fell the tree) etc.</ref> As a weapon it does not appear at all.<ref name=fx8_ve2_1879> In Rv. x. 92, 15, [[स्वधिति|Svadhiti]] may refer to the thunderbolt of Indra.</ref>

स्वधिति
<u>'''2. Svadhiti'''</u> in certain passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1880> v. 32, 10;<br> ix. 96, 6. ''Cf.'' i. 88, 2.</ref> denotes, according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, a great tree with hard wood. This interpretation seems probable.

स्वनद्-रथ
<u>'''Svanad-ratha'''</u> (‘having a rattling car’) is taken by Ludwig<ref name=fx1_ve2_1881> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 159.</ref> as a proper name of '''Āsaṅga''' in the Rigveda.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1881> viii. 1, 32.</ref> But the word is most probably only an epithet. 

स्वनय भाव्य
<u>'''Svanaya Bhāvya'''</u> is the name of a prince on the '''[[सिन्धु|Sindhu]]''' (Indus) who bestowed gifts on '''[[कक्षीवन्त्|Kakṣīvant]],''' according to the Rigveda (i. 126, 1. 3). He is called Svanaya [[भावयव्य|Bhāvayavya]] in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xvi. 11, 5).<br>==Foot Notes==

स्वप्न
<u>'''Svapna,'''</u> ‘dream,’ is referred to in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1883> ii. 28, 10;<br> x. 162, 6.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1883> Av. vii. 101, 1;<br> x. 3, 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xx. 16;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 2, 2, 23, etc.</ref> Evil dreams<ref name=fx3_ve2_1883> Rv. ii. 28, 10;<br> Av. x. 3, 6.</ref> are often mentioned. The Āraṇyakas of the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve2_1883> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 4;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, xi. 3. ''Cf.'' [[कौशिक|Kauśika]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xlvi. 9 ''et seq.;<br>'' Atharvaveda Pariśiṣṭa, lxviii.</ref> contain a list of dreams with their signification, as well as of ''pratyakṣa-darśanāni,'' ‘sights seen with one's own eyes.’

स्वर्
<u>'''Svar'''</u> denotes the ‘sun’<ref name=fx1_ve2_1884> i. 71, 2;<br> 105, 3;<br> 148, 1, etc.;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ii. 14.</ref> and the ‘heaven of light’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1884/> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1884> Rv. iii. 2, 7;<br> v. 83, 4;<br> x. 66, 4. 9, etc.;<br> Av. iv. 11, 6;<br> 14, 2, etc.</ref>

स्वर
<u>'''Svara'''</u> denotes in the Upaniṣads<ref name=fx1_ve2_1885> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 22, 5;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 2, 1.</ref> the sound of a vowel: these are described<ref name=fx2_ve2_1885> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ''loc. cit.''</ref> as being ''[[घोषवन्त्|ghoṣavant]],'' ‘sonant,’ and also as ''balavant,'' ‘uttered with force.’ The precise word for a mute is ''sparśa,''<ref name=fx3_ve2_1885> iii. 2, 1, etc.</ref> ‘contact,’ while ''ūṣman'' denotes a ‘sibilant,’ and ''[[स्वर|svara]]'' a ‘vowel,’ in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_1885/> and [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyakas.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1885> viii. 1, etc.</ref> The semivowels are there denoted by ''anta-sthā'' (‘intermediate’)<ref name=fx5_ve2_1885> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 2, 1.</ref> or ''akṣara.''<ref name=fx6_ve2_1885> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka, viii. 1.</ref> Another division in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx7_ve2_1885> ii. 2, 4.</ref> is into ''[[घोष|ghoṣa]], ūṣman,'' and ''vyañjana,'' apparently ‘vowels,’ ‘sibilants,’ and ‘consonants’ respectively. ''[[घोष|Ghoṣa]]'' elsewhere in that Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx8_ve2_1885> ii. 2, 2. ''Cf.'' Keith's edition, p. 213.</ref> seems to have the general sense of ‘sounds.’ The [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]]<ref name=fx9_ve2_1885> ''Loc. cit.''</ref> refers to ''[[मात्रा|mātrā]],'' a ‘mora’;<ref name=fx10_ve2_1885> Also [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka, iii. 1, 5;<br> Sāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka, vii. 13.</ref> ''bala,'' ‘force’ of utterance, and ''[[वर्ण|varṇa]],'' ‘letter,’ an expression found elsewhere<ref name=fx11_ve2_1885> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 32, 2;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxvi. 5;<br> Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], x. 4;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' v. 32.</ref> in the explanation of ''om,'' as compacted of ''a + u + m.'' <br><br>The [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx12_ve2_1885> iii. 1, 3, 5.</ref> and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Āraṇyaka<ref name=fx13_ve2_1885> vii. 10, 12.</ref> recognize the three forms of the Rigveda text as ''pratṛṇṇa, nirbhuja,'' and ''ubhayam-antareṇa,'' denoting respectively the Saṃhitā, Pada, and Krama Pāṭhas of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx14_ve2_1885> Max Müller, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]] Prātiśākhya,'' ii. ''et seq.;<br> Nachträge,'' ii;<br> Oldenberg, ''Prolegomena,'' 380 ''et seq.;<br> Sacred Books of the East,'' 30, 146 ''et seq.;<br>'' Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 51.</ref> The same authorities<ref name=fx15_ve2_1885> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]], iii. 2, 6;<br> [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]], viii. 11.</ref> recognize the importance of the distinction of the cerebral and dental ''n'' and ''s,'' and refer<ref name=fx16_ve2_1885> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]], iii. 1, 1;<br> 2, 6;<br> Sāṅkhāyana, vii. 2;<br> viii. 11.</ref> to the '''Māṇḍūkeyas'''' mode of recitation. They also discuss<ref name=fx17_ve2_1885> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]], iii. 1, 2. 3. 5;<br> 2, 2 [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]], vii. 13;<br> viii. 1, 2.</ref> Sandhi, the euphonic ‘combination’ of letters.<br><br>The Prātiśākhyas of the several Saṃhitās develop in detail the grammatical terminology, and Yāska's [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]<ref name=fx18_ve2_1885> See Roth's edition (1852), p. 222, for a list of teachers cited by [[यास्क|Yāska]], especially '''[[कौत्स|Kautsa]]''' and '''[[शाकटायन|Śākaṭāyana]].'''</ref> contains a good deal of grammatical material. The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx19_ve2_1885> x. 5, 1, 2. 3.</ref> distinguishes the genders, and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx20_ve2_1885> x. 9, 1. 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cultur,'' 701 ''et seq.''</ref> the division of words in the Sāman recitation.

स्व-राज्
<u>'''Sva-rāj,'''</u> ‘self-ruler,’ ‘king,’ is found frequently in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1886> i. 36, 7;<br> 51, 15;<br> 61, 9, etc. (of gods).</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1886> Av. xvii. 1, 22;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 6, 2;<br> iv. 4, 8, 1;<br> v. 5, 4, 1, etc.</ref> It is the technical term for the kings of the west according to the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_1886> viii. 14. ''Cf.'' perhaps the republican form of government of which traces are seen in the Buddhist literature by Rhys Davids, ''Buddhist India,'' 19.</ref>

स्वरु
<u>'''Svaru'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1887> i. 92, 5;<br> 162, 9;<br> iii. 8, 6, etc.</ref> or later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1887> Av. iv. 24, 4;<br> xii. 1, 13, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘post,’ or more precisely in the ritual a splinter of the [[यूप|Yūpa]], or sacrificial post.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1887> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 3, 8;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 7, 1;<br> vi. 3, 4 9, etc.;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7, 1, 22;<br> 8, 1, 5, etc.</ref> 

स्वर्-जित् नाग्न-जित
<u>'''Svar-jit Nāgna-jita'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[नग्न-जित्|Nagna-jit]]'''’) is the name of a royal personage in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1888> viii. 1, 4, 10. ''Cf.'' Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 1^2, 515.</ref> a '''[[गन्धार|Gandhāra]]''' prince, whose views on the ritual are referred to with contempt.

स्वर्-णर
<u>'''Svar-ṇara'''</u> appears to be the proper name of a sacrificer in two verses of the Rigveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1889> viii. 3, 12;<br> 12, 2. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 160;<br> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 17, 89.</ref> According to Geldner,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1889> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 209.</ref> it everywhere<ref name=fx3_ve2_1889> Rv. iv. 21, 3;<br> v. 18, 4;<br> 14, 1;<br> viii. 6, 39;<br> 65, 2;<br> 103, 14;<br> ix. 70, 6;<br> x. 65, 4. Perhaps in viii. 12, 2, it means ‘coming from [[स्वर्णर|Svarṇara]].’</ref> means a specially sacred lake and the Soma-producing district around it.

स्वर्-भानु असुर
<u>'''Svar-bhānu Asura'''</u> is the name, in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1890> v. 40, 5. 6. 8. 9.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1890> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 1, 2, 2;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 5, 2;<br> 6, 13;<br> vi. 6, 8;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 2, 2;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xxiv. 3.</ref> of a demon supposed to have eclipsed the sun. See '''[[सूर्य|Sūrya]].'''

स्व-सर
<u>'''Sva-sara,'''</u> according to the St. Petersburg Dictionary, denotes ‘cattle stall,’<ref name=fx1_ve2_1891> Rv. i. 3, 8;<br> ii. 2, 2;<br> 34, 8;<br> v. 62, 2;<br> viii. 88, 1;<br> [[सामवेद|Sāmaveda]], i. 5, 2, 3, 2.</ref> and more generally ‘dwelling-place,’ ‘house,’<ref name=fx2_ve2_1891> Rv. i. 34, 7;<br> iii. 60, 6;<br> 61, 4;<br> vi. 68, 10;<br> viii. 99, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 3, 5, 20.</ref> and then ‘nest of birds.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_1891> Rv. ii. 19, 2;<br> 34, 5.</ref> Geldner,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1891> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 110-115.</ref> however, shows that the real sense is the ‘wandering at will’ of cattle, more precisely their ‘grazing in the morning,’<ref name=fx5_ve2_1891> Rv. i. 3, 8;<br> ii. 2, 2;<br> 34, 8;<br> v. 62, 2;<br> viii. 88, 1.</ref> and in the case of birds their ‘early flight’ from the nest,<ref name=fx6_ve2_1891> Rv. ii. 19, 2;<br> 34, 5.</ref> while metaphorically it is applied first to the morning pressing of Soma and then to all three pressings.<ref name=fx7_ve2_1891> Rv. i. 34, 7;<br> iii. 60, 6;<br> vi. 68, 10;<br> viii. 99, 1. In Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''loc. cit.,'' it is equivalent to ‘libation.’</ref>

स्वसृ
<u>'''Svasṛ'''</u> is the regular word from the Rigveda onwards<ref name=fx1_ve2_1892> Rv. ii. 32, 6;<br> vi. 55, 4. 5;<br> viii. 101, 15;<br> x. 108, 9, etc.</ref> for ‘sister.’ Like the word '''[[भ्रातृ|Bhrātṛ]],''' the term sister can be applied  to things not precisely so related. For example, in the Rigveda the fingers and the seasons are ‘sisters,’ and night is the sister of dawn, for whom, as the elder, she makes way.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1892> Rv. i. 124, 8. See Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 463;<br> Rv. i. 62, 10;<br> 64, 7, 71, 1, etc.</ref> The '''Paṇis''' offer to adopt Saramā as their sister;<ref name=fx3_ve2_1892> Rv. x. 108, 9.</ref> but this use is not applied--any more than in the case of [[भ्रातृ|Bhrātṛ]]--to ordinary human beings.<br><br>The sister stood in a close relation to her brother. If the father was dead or feeble, the sister was dependent on her brother and on his wife, as appears from the Rigveda<ref name=fx4_ve2_1892> x. 85, 46. ''Cf.'' ix. 96, 22.</ref> and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx5_ve2_1892> iii. 37, 5.</ref> Moreover, maidens without brothers were apt to find marriage difficult, and to degenerate into Hetairai;<ref name=fx6_ve2_1892> Av. i. 17, 1;<br> Rv. i. 124, 7;<br> iv. 5, 5;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], iii. 5.</ref> but it is not certain whether this was due, as Zimmer<ref name=fx7_ve2_1892> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 328.</ref> thinks, to brothers being required to arrange marriages for orphan girls, or because sonless fathers were anxious to make their daughters '''Putrikās,''' in order that they themselves, instead of the husbands, should count the daughters' sons as their own.<ref name=fx8_ve2_1892> ''Cf.'' Geldner, ''Rigveda, Kommentar,'' 22, 48, 49 (on Rv. iii. 31, 1 ''et seq.'').</ref> See also '''[[जामि|Jāmi]].'''

स्वस्रीय
<u>'''Svasrīya'''</u> occurs in the sense of ‘sister's son’ in the description of Viśvarūpa's ancestry in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1893> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 5, 1, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, ii. 4, 1. ''Cf.'' Delbrück, ''Die indogermanischen Verwandtschaftsnamen,'' 485.</ref>

स्वाती
<u>'''Svātī.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

स्वाध्याय
<u>'''Svādhyāya'''</u> (‘reciting to oneself’) in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_1895> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 3, 6;<br> iv. 6, 9, 6;<br> xi. 5, 6, 3;<br> 7, 1, 4, 7;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 12, 1;<br> 8, 15;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 1.</ref> denotes the study or repetition of the Vedic texts. The Sūtras give rules for it in great detail. ''Cf.'' '''[[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].''' 

स्वायव
<u>'''Svāyava,'''</u> ‘descendant of Svāyu,’ is the patronymic of '''Kūśāmba [[लातव्य|Lātavya]]''' in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]] (viii. 6, 8).<br>==Foot Notes==

स्वा-राज्य
<u>'''Svā-rājya.'''</u> See '''[[राज्य|Rājya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

स्वेद-ज
<u>'''Sveda-ja,'''</u> ‘born of sweat’--that is, ‘engendered by hot moisture’--is used in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iii. 3, 3) as a term designating a class of creatures comprising vermin of all sorts. The [[मानव|Mānava]] [[धर्म|Dharma]] Śāstra (i. 45) explains it as ‘flies, mosquitoes, lice, bugs, and so forth.’<br><br>''Cf.'' Keith, ''[[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka,'' 235.<br>==Foot Notes==

स्वैदायन
<u>'''Svaidāyana,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''Sveda,'''’ is the patronymic of a '''[[शौनक|Śaunaka]]''' in the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1899> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 4, 1, 2. 3;<br> Gopatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 6.</ref>

स्वौपश
<u>'''Svaupaśa.'''</u> See '''[[ओपश|Opaśa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

हंस
<u>'''Haṃsa'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1901> i. 65, 5;<br> 163, 10;<br> ii. 34, 5;<br> iii. 8, 9, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1901> Av. vi. 12, 1, etc.</ref> denotes the ‘gander.’ These birds are described as dark in colour on the back (''nīlapṛṣṭha'');<ref name=fx3_ve2_1901> Rv. vii. 59, 7.</ref> they fly in troops,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1901> Rv. iii. 8, 9.</ref> swim in the water (''uda-prut''),<ref name=fx5_ve2_1901> Rv. i. 65, 5;<br> iii. 45, 4.</ref> make loud noises,<ref name=fx6_ve2_1901> Rv. iii. 53, 10.</ref> and are wakeful at night.<ref name=fx7_ve2_1901> Av. vi. 12, 1.</ref> The [[हंस|Haṃsa]] is credited with the power of separating Soma from water (as later milk from water) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx8_ve2_1901> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxviii. 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 11, 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xix. 74;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 6, 2, 1.</ref> It is also mentioned as one of the victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’).<ref name=fx9_ve2_1901> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 21, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 22. 35.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 89, 90;<br> Lanman, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 19, 151;<br> Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 150.</ref> 

हंस-साचि
<u>'''Haṃsa-sāci'''</u> is the name of an unknown bird mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx1_ve2_1902> v. 5, 20, 1. ''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 93.</ref> as one of the victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’).

हय
<u>'''Haya'''</u> denotes ‘horse’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1903> v. 46, 1;<br> vii. 74, 4;<br> ix. 107, 25.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1903> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, vii. 47;<br> xxii. 19, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 231.</ref>

हर-याण
<u>'''Hara-yāṇa'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1904> viii. 28, 22;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], v. 15. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 162.</ref> is clearly the name of a man mentioned along with '''[[उक्षण्यायन|Ukṣaṇyāyana]]''' and '''[[सुषामन्|Suṣāman]].'''

हरिण
<u>'''Hariṇa'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1905> i. 163, 1;<br> v. 78, 2.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1905> Av. vi. 67, 3, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘gazelle.’ It is at once a type of speed<ref name=fx3_ve2_1905> Av. iii. 7, 1.</ref> and terror.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1905> Av. vi. 67, 3.</ref> Its horns are used as amulets.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1905> Av. iii. 7, 1. 2.</ref> It is fond of eating barley ('''Yava''').<ref name=fx6_ve2_1905> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 19, 2 (''hariṇī'');<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiii. 30;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 13, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]], iv. 8 (also ''hariṇī'');<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 9, 7, 2 (''hariṇī'').</ref> In the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx7_ve2_1905> iii. 9, 3.</ref> it is said to kill vipers ('''[[स्वज|Svaja]]'''). ''Cf.'' '''[[कुलुङ्ग|Kuluṅga]], [[न्यङ्कु|Nyaṅku]].''' The feminine is Hariṇī.<ref name=fx8_ve2_1905> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 19, 2, and see n. 6.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 83;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 336, 337.</ref>

हरित
<u>'''1. Harita'''</u> seems to mean ‘gold’ in a few passages of the Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1906> Av. v. 28, 5. 9;<br> xi. 3, 8;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, viii. 5.</ref>

हरित कश्यप
<u>'''2. Harita Kaśyapa'''</u> is mentioned as a teacher, a pupil of '''[[शिल्प कश्यप|Śilpa Kaśyapa]],''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1907> vi. 4, 33 (Mādhyaṃdina = vi. 5, 3 [[काण्व|Kāṇva]]).</ref> 

हरि-द्रु
<u>'''Hari-dru'''</u> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 8, 1, 16) is the name of a tree (''Pinus deodora'').<br>==Foot Notes==

हरिमन्
<u>'''Hariman'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1909> i. 50, 11 ''et seq.''</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1909> i. 22, 1;<br> ix. 8, 9;<br> xix. 44, 2.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 378, 388.</ref> denotes ‘yellowness’ as a disease, ‘jaundice.’

हरि-यूपीया
<u>'''Hari-yūpīyā'''</u> is mentioned in a hymn of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1910> vi. 27, 5.</ref> as the scene of the defeat of the '''Vṛcīvants''' by '''Abhyāvartin Cāyamana.''' It may denote either a place or a river, since many battles seem to have been fought on the banks of rivers. Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve2_1910> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 158.</ref> took it as the name of a town on the river '''[[यव्यावती|Yavyāvatī]],''' which is identified with it in Sāyaṇa's commentary on the passage. Hillebrandt<ref name=fx3_ve2_1910> ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 268, n. 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 18, 19;<br> Kaegi, ''Rigveda,'' n. 328.</ref> thinks that it is the river Iryāb (Haliāb), a tributary of the Kurum ('''[[क्रुमु|Krumu]]'''), but this is not at all probable.

हरि-वर्ण अङ्गिरस
<u>'''Hari-[[वर्ण|varṇa]] Aṅgirasa'''</u> (‘descendant of Aṅgiras’) is the name of the seer of a Sāman or chant in the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1911> viii. 9, 4. 5. ''Cf.'' Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 63.</ref>

हरि-श्चन्द्र वैधस
<u>'''Hari-ścandra Vaidhasa'''</u> (‘descendant of Vedhas’) '''[[ऐक्ष्वाक|Aikṣvāka]]''' (‘descendant of '''[[इक्ष्वाकु|Ikṣvāku]]'''’) is the name of a probably mythical king whose rash vow to offer up his son '''[[रोहित|Rohita]]''' to Varuṇa is the source of the tale of '''[[शुनःशेप|Śunaḥśepa]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Brāhmana (vii. 14, 2) and the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xv. 17).<br>==Foot Notes==

हर्म्य
<u>'''Harmya'''</u> denotes the Vedic ‘house’ as a unity including the stabling<ref name=fx1_ve2_1913> Rv. vii. 56, 16. ''Cf.'' x. 106, 5.</ref> and so forth, and surrounded by a fence or wall of  some sort.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1913> Rv. vii. 55, 6. Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 278, n. 2, takes ''harmyeṣṭhāḥ,'' ‘standing on a house’ (Rv. vii. 56, 16), to refer to princes on the roof of a palace.</ref> It is several times referred to in the Rigveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_1913> i. 121, 1 (the people, ''viśaḥ,'' of the house);<br> 166, 4;<br> ix. 71, 4;<br> 78, 3;<br> x. 43, 3;<br> 73, 10, etc.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1913> Av. xviii. 4, 55 (a palace of Yama);<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7, 6, 3, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 149.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[गृह|Gṛha]].'''

हलिक्ष्ण
<u>'''Halikṣṇa'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1914> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 12;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 31.</ref> or '''Halīkṣṇa'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1914> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 12, 1;<br> 7, 23, 1.</ref> is mentioned as one of the victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās. The commentator Mahīdhara<ref name=fx3_ve2_1914> On Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> thinks that it is a kind of lion, Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx4_ve2_1914> On [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> that a green Caṭaka bird or a lion (''[[तृण|tṛṇa]]-hiṃsa'')<ref name=fx5_ve2_1914> ''[[तृण|Tṛṇa]]-[[सिंह|siṃha]]'' is not much more intelligible.</ref> is meant. In the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx6_ve2_1914> ii. 33, 3.</ref> Halīkṣṇa seems to be some particular intestine, but Weber<ref name=fx7_ve2_1914> ''Indische Studien,'' 13, 206.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 79.</ref> thinks it may mean ‘gall.’

हविर्-धान
<u>'''Havir-dhāna'''</u> (‘oblation receptacle’) denotes primarily the cart on which the Soma plants are conveyed to be pressed,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1915> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 1, 3, 1;<br> vi. 2, 9, 1. 4, etc.</ref> then the shed in which these Soma vehicles were kept.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1915> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 2, 11, 1. 4, etc.<br><br>See '''[[गृह|Gṛha]];<br>''' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 154.</ref>

हविष्-कृत् आङ्गिरस
<u>'''Haviṣ-kṛt Āṅgirasa'''</u> (‘descendant of '''[[अङ्गिरस्|Aṅgiras]]'''’) is the name of the seer of a Sāman or chant according to the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1916> xi. 10, 9. 10;<br> xx. 11, 3.</ref> and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1916> vii. 1, 4, 1.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 2, 160;<br> Hopkins, ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences,'' 15, 62.</ref> See the following.

हविष्मन्त् आङ्गिरस
<u>'''Haviṣmant Āṅgirasa'''</u> is mentioned along with '''Haviṣkṛt,''' in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā and the [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx2_ve2_1917> xi. 10, 9. 10;<br> xx. 11, 3.</ref> as the seer of a Sāman or chant.<br><br>^1) vii. 1, 4, 1. 

हविस्
<u>'''Havis'''</u> is the general term for an offering to the gods, ‘oblation,’ whether of grain, or Soma, or milk, or clarified butter, etc. It is common from the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1918> i. 24, 11;<br> 26, 6;<br> 170, 5, etc.</ref> onwards.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1918> Av. iii. 10, 5;<br> vi. 5, 3, etc.</ref>

हस्त
<u>'''Hasta.'''</u> See '''[[नक्षत्र|Nakṣatra]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

हस्त-घ्न
<u>'''Hasta-ghna'''</u> denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1920> vi. 75, 14;<br> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]], ix. 14. The reading is assured by the parallels in the Saṃhitās: [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 6, 6, 5;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 16, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxix. 51.</ref> a ‘hand-guard,’ a covering used as a protection of the hand and arm from the impact of the bowstring. The word is of remarkable and still unexplained formation.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1920> Pischel, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 296;<br> Oldenberg, ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]]-Noten,'' 1, 416.</ref> Lāṭyāyana<ref name=fx3_ve2_1920> Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 10, 7.</ref> has ''[[हस्त|hasta]]-tra'' and the Epic ''hastāvāpa''<ref name=fx4_ve2_1920> Hopkins, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 13, 308.</ref> as its equivalent in sense.

हस्तादान
<u>'''Hastādāna.'''</u> See '''[[पशु|Paśu]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

हस्तिन्
<u>'''Hastin,'''</u> ‘having a hand,’ with '''[[मृग|Mṛga]],''' ‘beast,’ denotes in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1922> i. 64, 7;<br> iv. 16, 14.</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_1922> xii. 1, 25. Elsewhere [[हस्तिन्|Hastin]] is used alone: iii. 22, 3;<br> iv. 36, 9;<br> vi. 38, 2;<br> 70, 2;<br> xix. 1, 32.</ref> the ‘elephant.’ Later the adjective alone comes to mean ‘elephant.’<ref name=fx3_ve2_1922> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 11, 1;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iii. 14, 8;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 29;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 8, 8;<br> xxiii. 13, 2;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 14;<br> v. 31, 2;<br> vi. 27, 2;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 3, 4, etc.;<br> Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], vii. 24, 2 (coupled with gold), etc.;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 22, 1.</ref> The animal was famed for its strength<ref name=fx4_ve2_1922> Rv. ''loc. cit.;<br>'' Av ii. 22, 1, 3.</ref> as well as its virility.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1922> Av. iii. 22, 6;<br> vi. 70, 2.</ref> It is mentioned with man and monkey as one of the beasts that take hold by the hand (''[[हस्तादान|hastādāna]]''), as opposed to those that take hold by the mouth (''mukhādāna'').<ref name=fx6_ve2_1922> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 4, 5, 7;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv, 5, 7.</ref> It was tamed, as the expression '''[[हस्तिप|Hastipa]],''' ‘elephant-keeper,’ shows, and tame elephants were used to catch others (see '''[[वारण|Vāraṇa]]'''). But there is no trace of its use in war, though Ktesias and Megasthenes both record such use for  their times.<ref name=fx7_ve2_1922> Von Schroeder, ''Indiens Literatur und Cidtur,'' 434.</ref> The Atharvaveda<ref name=fx8_ve2_1922> Av. iv. 36, 9.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 80.</ref> alludes to its being pestered by mosquitoes.

हस्ति-प
<u>'''Hasti-pa,'''</u> ‘elephant-keeper,’ is mentioned as one of the victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1923> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 11;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 9, 1.</ref>

हस्रा
<u>'''Hasrā'''</u> (‘laughing woman’) in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1924> i. 124, 7.</ref> denotes a courtesan according to Pischel.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1924> ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 196, 308.</ref>

हायन
<u>'''Hāyana'''</u> denotes a ‘year,’ usually in compounds.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1925> Av. viii. 2, 21;<br> ''śata-[[हायन|hāyana]],'' ‘a hundred years old,’ viii. 2, 8;<br> 7, 22;<br> ''hāyanī,'' xii. 1, 36 (probably corrupt).</ref> In the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā<ref name=fx2_ve2_1925> xv. 5.</ref> and the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_1925> v. 3, 3, 6 (the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 8, 10, 1, has instead ''mahā-[[व्रीहि|vrīhi]],'' ‘great rice’).</ref> the term appears as a designation of a species of red rice. As an adjective in the sense of ‘lasting a year’ or ‘recurring every year,’ it is applied to fever in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1925> xix. 39, 10.<br><br>''Cf.'' Schrader, ''Prehistoric Antiquities,'' 301.</ref>

हारिकर्णी-पुत्र
<u>'''Hārikarṇī-putra,'''</u> ‘son of a female descendant of Harikarṇa,’ is the name of a teacher, a pupil of '''[[भारद्वाजी-पुत्र|Bhāradvājī-putra]],''' in the last [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) in the Mādhyaṃdina recension of the Brhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 4, 30).<br>==Foot Notes==

हारिद्रव
<u>'''Hāridrava'''</u> is the name of a yellow bird in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1927> i. 50, 12;<br> viii. 35, 7.</ref> perhaps the ‘yellow water-wagtail.’<ref name=fx2_ve2_1927> Sāyaṇa on Rv. i. 50, 12;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 7, 6, 2, treats it as the name of a plant (''cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 62). But on Av. i. 22, 4, he takes it as ''gopītanaka,'' ‘wagtail.’</ref> Geldner<ref name=fx3_ve2_1927> ''Rigveda, Glossar,'' 213.<br><br>''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 264, n. 1;<br> 266;<br> Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 23.</ref> compares the Greek  

हारिद्रविक
<u>'''Hāridravika'''</u> is the title of a work by Hāridravin mentioned in the [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1928> ix. 5. See Roth, ''[[निरुक्त|Nirukta]],'' xxiii;<br> von Schroeder, Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, 1, xiii.</ref>

हारि-द्रुमत
<u>'''Hāri-drumata,'''</u> ‘descendant of Haridrumant,’ is the patronymic of a '''[[गौतम|Gautama]]''' in the Chāndogya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (iv. 4, 3).<br>==Foot Notes==

हालिङ्गव
<u>'''Hāliṅgava,'''</u> ‘descendant of Haliṅgu,’ is the name of a teacher in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (x. 4, 5, 1).<br>==Foot Notes==

हिता
<u>'''Hitā'''</u> in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_1931> Bṛhadāraṇyaka [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], ii. 1, 21;<br> iv. 2, 4;<br> 3, 20;<br> [[कौषीतकि|Kauṣītaki]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 19.</ref> is the name of certain ‘veins.’ ''Cf.'' '''[[हिरा|Hirā]].'''

हिम
<u>'''Hima,'''</u> denoting ‘cold,’ ‘cold weather,’ is quite common in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1932> i. 116, 8;<br> 119, 6;<br> viii. 32, 26, etc.</ref> but less frequent later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1932> Av. vii. 18, 2;<br> xiii. 1, 46;<br> xix. 49, 5 (night as mother of coolness), etc.</ref> As ‘snow’ the word appears as a masculine in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_1932> iii. 12, 7, 2.</ref> and often later as a neuter.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1932> Saḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 9, etc.<br><br>''Cf.'' Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 3, 192-195.</ref> ''Cf.'' '''[[हेमन्त|Hemanta]].'''

हिमवन्त्
<u>'''Himavant,'''</u> ‘snowy,’ appears as an epithet of mountains in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1933> xii. 1, 11.</ref> It is also used both there<ref name=fx2_ve2_1933> vi. 95, 3. See also iv. 9, 9;<br> v. 4, 2. 8;<br> 25. 7;<br> vi. 24, 1 (where reference is made to the rivers of the Himālayas);<br> xix. 39, 1.</ref> and in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1933> x. 121, 4.</ref> as well as later,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1933> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 5, 11, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxiv. 30;<br> xxv. 12;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], viii. 14, 3 (the '''Uttara Kurus''' and '''Uttara Madras''' live beyond it;<br> perhaps in Kaśmīr), etc.</ref> as a noun. There seems no reasen to deny that in all the passages the word refers vaguely to the mountains now called Himālaya, though it is possible that the name may include mountains not strictly in that system, like the Suleiman hills.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1933> Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 198.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leven,'' 29;<br> Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 18, 12, who inclines to see a reminiscence of the Caucasus.</ref> See also '''[[मूजवन्त्|Mūjavant]]''' and '''Trikakubh.''' 

हिमा
<u>'''Himā'''</u> denotes ‘winter’ in the combination a ‘hundred winters’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1934> i. 64, 14;<br> ii. 33, 2;<br> v. 54, 15;<br> vi. 48, 8.</ref> and elsewhere.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1934> Av. ii. 28, 4;<br> xii. 2, 28;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 6, 6, 3;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, ii. 27.</ref>

हिरणिन्
<u>'''Hiraṇin,'''</u> ‘rich in gold,’ is apparently an epithet of '''[[त्रसदस्यु|Trasadasyu]]''' in one verse of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1935> v. 53, 8.</ref> referring to the golden raiment or possessions of the king. Ludwig,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1935> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 155.</ref> however, thinks the word is a proper name, possibly of Trasadasyu's son.

हिरणिन
<u>'''Hiraṇina'''</u> is found in one passage of the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1936> vi. 63, 9.</ref> where Ludwig<ref name=fx2_ve2_1936> Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 158.</ref> takes the word as a name of '''[[शाण्ड|Śāṇḍa]].''' But it seems to be an adjectival form of ''[[हिरणिन्|hiraṇin]],'' ‘golden.’

हिरण्य
<u>'''Hiraṇya'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1937> i. 43, 5;<br> iii. 34, 9;<br> iv. 10, 6;<br> 17, 11, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1937> Av. i. 9, 2;<br> ii. 36, 7;<br> v. 28, 6;<br> vi. 38, 2, etc.</ref> denotes ‘gold.’ It is hardly possible to exaggerate the value attached to gold by the Vedic Indians. The metal was, it is clear, won from the bed of rivers. Hence the Indus is called ‘golden’<ref name=fx3_ve2_1937> Rv. x. 75, 8.</ref> and ‘of golden stream.’<ref name=fx4_ve2_1937> Rv. vi. 61, 7;<br> viii. 26, 18.</ref> Apparently the extraction of gold from the earth was known,<ref name=fx5_ve2_1937> Rv. i. 117, 5;<br> Av. xii. 1, 6. 26. 44.</ref> and washing for gold is also recorded.<ref name=fx6_ve2_1937> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 1, 7, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 1, 1, 5.</ref><br><br>Gold is the object of the wishes of the Vedic singer,<ref name=fx7_ve2_1937> Rv. vi. 47, 23;<br> viii. 78, 9;<br> Pischel and Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, xxiv.</ref> and golden treasures (''hiraṇyāni'') are mentioned as given by patrons<ref name=fx8_ve2_1937> ''Cf.'' also '''[[हिरण्यस्तूप|Hiraṇyastūpa]]''' as a proper name.</ref> along with cows and horses. Gold was used for ornaments for neck and breast ('''[[निष्क|Niṣka]]'''), for ear-rings ('''[[कर्ण-शोभन|Karṇa-śobhana]]'''), and even for cups.<ref name=fx9_ve2_1937> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 7, 1, 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 3, 3, 7;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 1, 2, 19;<br> 5, 28.</ref> Gold is always associated with the gods.<ref name=fx10_ve2_1937> All that is connected with them is of gold;<br> the horses of the sun are ''[[हिरण्य|hiraṇya]]-tvacas,'' ‘gold-skinned’ (Av. xiii. 2, 8), and so on.</ref> <br><br>In the plural [[हिरण्य|Hiraṇya]] denotes ‘ornaments of gold.’<ref name=fx11_ve2_1937> Rv. i. 122, 2;<br> 162, 16;<br> ii. 33, 9;<br> v. 60, 4;<br> Av. iv. 10, 6;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xv. 50;<br> xx. 37;<br> also in the singular, Av. i. 35, 1;<br> xviii. 4, 56.</ref><br><br>A gold currency was evidently beginning to be known in so far as definite weights of gold are mentioned: thus a weight, ''aṣṭā-prūḍ,'' occurs in the Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx12_ve2_1937> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iii. 4, 1, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xi. 1;<br> xiii. 10;<br> von Schroeder, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 49, 164.</ref> and the golden ''[[शतमान|śatamāna]],'' ‘weight of a hundred ('''Kṛṣṇalas''')’ is found in the same texts.<ref name=fx13_ve2_1937> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 5, 5, 16;<br> xii. 7, 2, 13;<br> 9, 1, 4. ''Cf.'' xiii. 1, 1, 4;<br> 2, 3, 2;<br> 4, 1, 13;<br> 2, 7. 13;<br> xiv. 3, 1, 32;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 3, 11, 5;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, viii. 5;<br> xxii. 8;<br> Weber, ''Indische Streifen,'' 1, 101. Geldner, ''Vedische Studien,'' 1, 268, is inclined to think that a gold unit is alluded to in the vague phrases ‘thousands,’ etc., of the Rigveda. See viii. 1, 13;<br> 65, 12;<br> x. 95, 3, etc.</ref> In several passages,<ref name=fx14_ve2_1937> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 7, 4;<br> iii. 8, 2, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 7, 1, 7;<br> xiii. 4, 1, 6, etc.</ref> moreover, ''[[हिरण्य|hiraṇya]]'' or ''hiraṇyāni'' may mean ‘pieces of gold.’<br><br>Gold is described sometimes as ''[[हरित|harita]],''<ref name=fx15_ve2_1937> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, x. 4;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 4, 4, 6;<br> Ṣaḍviṃśa [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 9.</ref> ‘yellowish,’ sometimes as ''[[रजत|rajata]],''<ref name=fx16_ve2_1937> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, i. 5, 1, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xii. 4, 4, 7;<br> xiii. 4, 2, 10, etc.</ref> ‘whitish,’ when probably. ‘silver’ is alluded to. It was obtained from the ore by smelting.<ref name=fx17_ve2_1937> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vi. 1, 3, 5. ''Cf.'' ii. 2, 3, 28;<br> xii. 4, 3, 1;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xvii. 6, 4 (''niṣ-ṭap,'' ‘heat’);<br> Jaiminīya [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 10 (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 16, 234, ccxliii);<br> Lāṭyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iii. 1, 9, etc.;<br> Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 34, 6.</ref> Megasthenes<ref name=fx18_ve2_1937> See Diodorus Siculus, ii. 36;<br> Strabo, pp. 703, 711.<br><br>''Cf.'' Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 49-51;<br> Macdonell, ''Sanskrit Literature,'' 151.</ref> bears testimony to the richness in gold of India in his time.

हिरण्य-कशिपु
<u>'''Hiraṇya-kaśipu'''</u> in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_1938> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 9, 20, 1;<br> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], vii. 18, 12. ''Cf.'' the word as an adjective with the sense of ‘having a golden cloth,’ Av. v. 7, 10.</ref> denotes a ‘golden seat,’ probably one covered with cloth of gold.

हिरण्य-कार
<u>'''Hiraṇya-kāra'''</u> denotes a ‘worker in gold’ mentioned in the list of victims at the Puruṣamedha (‘human sacrifice’) in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1939> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxx. 17;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 14, 1.</ref> 

हिरण्य-दन्त्
<u>'''Hiraṇya-dant'''</u> (‘gold-toothed’) '''[[वैद|Vaida]]''' (‘descendant of Veda’) is the name of a teacher in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 6, 3) and the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka (ii. 1, 5). The name presumably refers to the use of gold to stop the teeth; see '''Dant.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

हिरण्य-नाभ
<u>'''Hiraṇya-nābha'''</u> is the name of a '''[[कौसल्य|Kausalya]]''' or [[कोसल|Kosala]] prince, whose horse sacrifice appears to be alluded to in the [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xvi. 9, 13). He is also referred to in the [[प्रश्न|Praśna]] [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] (vi. 1), and may have been connected with '''[[पर आट्णार|Para Āṭṇāra]].''' ''Cf.'' '''[[हैरण्य-नाभ|Hairaṇya-nābha]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

हिरण्य-स्तूप
<u>'''Hiraṇya-stūpa'''</u> is the name of a man in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1942> x. 149, 5.</ref> and in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx2_ve2_1942> i. 6, 4, 2.</ref> He is called an '''[[आङ्गिरस|Āṅgirasa]]''' in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]],<ref name=fx3_ve2_1942> iii. 24, 11.</ref> which credits him with the authorship of a Rigvedic hymn.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1942> i. 32.</ref> The Anukramaṇī (Index) ascribes to him several other hymns.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1942> i. 31-35;<br> ix. 4, 69. ''Cf.'' Ludwig, Translation of the Rigveda, 3, 104, 141.</ref>

हिरण्य-हस्त
<u>'''Hiraṇya-hasta'''</u> is in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1943> i. 116, 13;<br> 117, 24;<br> vi. 62, 7;<br> x. 39, 7. He appears to be called '''[[श्याव|Śyāva]]''' in x. 65, 12. ''Cf.'' Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 52.</ref> the name of a son given by the Aśvins to '''[[वध्रिमती|Vadhrimatī]]''' (who, as her name denotes, was the wife of a eunuch).

हिरा
<u>'''Hirā'''</u> in the '''Atharvaveda'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1944> i. 17, 1;<br> vii. 35, 2;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxv. 8. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Omina und Portenta,'' 346.</ref> denotes ‘vein,’ like '''[[हिता|Hitā]].'''

हृत्स्व्-आशय आल्लकेय
<u>'''Hṛtsv-āśaya Āllakeya'''</u> is mentioned in the Jaiminīya [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 40, 2) in the [[वंश|Vaṃśa]] (list of teachers) as a pupil of '''[[सोमशुष्म सात्ययज्ञि|Somaśuṣma Sātyayajñi]] [[प्राचीनयोग्य|Prācīnayogya]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

हृदयामय
<u>'''Hṛdayāmaya,'''</u> ‘disease of the heart,’ is mentioned in the Atharvaveda in connexion with '''[[यक्ष्म|Yakṣma]]'''<ref name=fx1_ve2_1946> v. 30, 9.</ref> and with '''[[बलास|Balāsa]].'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1946> vi. 14, 1;<br> 127, 3.</ref>  Zimmer,<ref name=fx3_ve2_1946> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 387.</ref> who thinks that '''[[बलास|Balāsa]]''' is consumption, connects the name with the later view of the medical Saṃhitās,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1946> Wise, ''Hindu System of Medicine,'' 321, 322.</ref> that love is one of the causes of the disease. But it would be more natural to see in it a disease affecting the heart.

हृद्-योत
<u>'''Hṛd-yota'''</u><ref name=fx1_ve2_1947> Av. i. 22, 1. ''Cf.'' vi. 24, 1.</ref> (for '''Hṛd-dyota''') and '''Hṛd-roga,'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1947> Rv. i. 50, 11.</ref> ‘heart disease,’ are mentioned in the Atharvaveda and the Rigveda respectively. Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve2_1947> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 388.</ref> identifies the disease in the Atharvaveda with '''[[हृदयामय|Hṛdayāmaya]],''' ‘consumption caused by love.’ In the Rigveda this is not at all likely: later in the medical Saṃhitās the word probably denotes ''angina pectoris.''<ref name=fx4_ve2_1947> Wise, ''Hindu System of Medicine,'' 321.</ref>

हेमन्
<u>'''Heman'''</u> (used only in the locative singular) denotes ‘winter’ in the later Saṃhitās and the Brāhmaṇas.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1948> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 6, 1, 1;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxxvi. 6;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 10, 10;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 5, 4, 5;<br> xi. 2, 7, 32.</ref>

हेमन्त
<u>'''Hemanta,'''</u> ‘winter,’ occurs only once in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1949> x. 161, 4.</ref> but often in the later texts.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1949> Av. vi. 55, 2;<br> viii. 2, 22;<br> xii. 1, 36;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, v. 7, 2, 4;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xiii. 58;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxi. 15, 2;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 4, 10, 10;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], x. 4, 5, 2 etc.</ref> Zimmer<ref name=fx3_ve2_1949> ''Altindisches Leben,'' 40.</ref> is inclined to trace differences of climate in the Rigveda: he thinks that certain hymns,<ref name=fx4_ve2_1949> Rv. vii. 103;<br> x. 90.</ref> which ignore winter and insist on the rains, indicate a different place and time of origin from those which refer to the snowy mountains.<ref name=fx5_ve2_1949> Rv. x. 68, 10;<br> 121, 4 (both these are not early hymns).</ref> It is, however, quite impossible to separate parts of the Rigveda on this basis. It is probable that that text owes its composition in the main to residents in the later '''[[मध्यदेश|Madhyadeśa]];''' hence the references to cold and snow are rather a sign of local than of temporal differences. It is otherwise with the later expansion of the three into four seasons,  which represents clearly the earlier advance of the Indians (see '''[[ऋतु|Ṛtu]]''').<br><br>The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx6_ve2_1949> i. 5, 4, 5.</ref> describes winter as the time when the plants wither, the leaves fall from the trees, the birds fly low and retire more and more.

हैत-नामन
<u>'''Haita-nāmana,'''</u> ‘descendant of Hitanāman,’ is the patronymic of a teacher apparently called Āhṛta in the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā,<ref name=fx1_ve2_1950> iii. 4, 6. See Pāṇini, vi. 4, 170, Vārttika, and von Schroeder, Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, 2, ix.</ref> though the verse is a strange one.

हैरण्य-नाभ
<u>'''Hairaṇya-nābha,'''</u> ‘descendant of '''[[हिरण्यनाभ|Hiraṇyanābha]],'''’ is the patronymic of '''[[पर आट्णार|Para Āṭṇāra]],''' the '''[[कोसल|Kosala]]''' king, in a '''[[गाथा|Gāthā]]''' occurring in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (xiii. 5, 4, 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

होतृ
<u>'''Hotṛ'''</u> is the name of one of the oldest and most important priests of the Vedic ritual, the counterpart of the Zaotar of the Avestan priesthood.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1952> Rv. i. 1, 1;<br> 14, 11;<br> 139, 10, etc.;<br> '''Hotra,''' the ‘Hotṛ's office,’ Rv. ii. 1, 2;<br> 36, 1;<br> 37, 1, etc.</ref> The word must be derived from ''hu,'' ‘sacrifice,’ as was held by '''[[और्णवाभ|Aurṇavābha]];'''<ref name=fx2_ve2_1952> [[निरुक्त|Nirukta]]. iv. 26. ''Cf.'' Oldenberg, ''Religion des Veda,'' 380 ''et seq.''</ref> this indicates a time when the [[होतृ|Hotṛ]] was at once sacrificer (the later [[अध्वर्यु|Adhvaryu]]) and singer. But the functions were already clearly divided in the Rigveda, where the Hotṛ's chief duty was the recitation of the '''Śastras.''' He was also in the older period often the '''[[पुरोहित|Purohita]]''' of the king, an office later filled by the '''[[ब्रह्मन्|Brahman]]''' priest.

होत्रक
<u>'''Hotraka'''</u> in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx1_ve2_1953> ii. 36, 5;<br> vi. 6, 2. In the Sūtras it is variously used--sometimes in this sense, sometimes more widely--so as to include all the priests except the four chief priests (''cf.'' Āśvalāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], v. 6, 17).</ref> denotes ‘assistant of the Hotṛ’ priest. 

ह्यस्
<u>'''Hyas'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1954> viii. 66, 7;<br> 99, 1;<br> x. 55, 5.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1954> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 9, 3.</ref> denotes ‘yesterday.’

ह्रद
<u>'''Hrada'''</u> in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1955> i. 52, 7;<br> iii. 36, 8;<br> 45, 3;<br> x. 43, 7;<br> 71, 7;<br> 102, 4;<br> 142, 8, etc.</ref> and later<ref name=fx2_ve2_1955> Av. iv. 15, 4;<br> vi. 37, 2;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], xxv. 10, 18;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iv. 1, 5, 12;<br> 4, 5, 10;<br> xi. 5, 5, 8, etc.</ref> denotes a ‘lake’ or ‘pond.’

ह्रदे-चक्षुस्
<u>'''Hrade-cakṣus'''</u> in one passage of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1956> x. 95, 6.</ref> is thought by Jackson<ref name=fx2_ve2_1956> ''Proceedings of the American Oriental Society,'' May, 1890, iv.</ref> to mean ‘will of the wisp.’

ह्रस्व माण्डूकेय
<u>'''Hrasva Māṇḍūkeya'''</u> (‘descendant of Maṇḍūka’) is the name of a teacher in the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] Āraṇyaka.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1957> iii. 1, 5;<br> 2, 1. 6. ''Cf.'' Weber, ''Indische Studien,'' 1, 391. The word must be regarded as a proper name, given from a personal characteristic, much as '''[[स्थविर|Sthavira]]''' is used.</ref>

ह्रादुनि
<u>'''Hrāduni'''</u> denotes ‘hail’ in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1958> i. 32, 13;<br> v. 54, 3.</ref> and later.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1958> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vii. 4, 13, 1;<br> Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā, xxii. 26;<br> xxvi. 9, etc.</ref>

ह्रूडु
<u>'''Hrūḍu'''</u> is a word of unknown meaning applied to '''[[तक्मन्|Takman]]''' in the Atharvaveda.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1959> i. 25, 2. 3.</ref> It is variously spelled in the manuscript as ''hruḍa, hūḍu, rūḍu,'' and so forth; the Paippalāda recension reads ''huḍu,'' ‘ram.’ Henry<ref name=fx2_ve2_1959> ''Journal Asiatique,'' 9th series, 10, 513.</ref> has conjectured that the word is the equivalent of a proto-Semitic ''ḥarāḍu,'' ‘gold’ (Assyrian ''huraçu'' and Hebrew ''ḥarāç''), while Halévy<ref name=fx3_ve2_1959> ''Ibid.,'' 11, 320 ''et seq.''</ref> suggests that it may be the Greek  ‘greenish-yellow’; but both conjectures are highly improbable.<ref name=fx4_ve2_1959> Macdonell, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1907, 1106.</ref> Weber<ref name=fx5_ve2_1959> ''Indische Studien,'' 4, 420.<br><br>''Cf.'' Lanman on Whitney, Translation of the Atharvaveda, 26;<br> Bloomfield, ''Hymns of the Atharvaveda,'' 273.</ref> thinks ‘cramp’ is meant. 

ह्वरस्
<u>'''Hvaras'''</u> in three passages of the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1960> ix. 3, 2;<br> 63, 4;<br> 106, 13.</ref> denotes, according to Roth,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1960> St. Petersburg Dictionary, ''s.v.'' 1;<br> Zimmer, ''Altindisches Leben,'' 278, n.;<br> Hillebrandt, ''Vedische Mythologie,'' 1, 203.</ref> a part of the Soma sieve, perhaps the part through which the Soma juice flowed. But Geldner<ref name=fx3_ve2_1960> ''Vedische Studien,'' 2, 20</ref> thinks that in all these cases the sense is merely ‘hindrance.’ 

अङ्गुलि
<u>'''Aṅguli,'''</u> ‘finger-breadth,’ is mentioned as the ‘lowest measure’ in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]].<ref name=fx1_ve2_1961> x. 2, 1, 2. See Fleet, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1912, 231.</ref>

अनस्
<u>'''Anas.'''</u>--In the Sūtras<ref name=fx1_ve2_1962> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 38;<br> Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xix. 26, 4. ''Cf. tri-gadha, ibid.,'' xix. 26, 2.</ref> mention is made of a part of the cart called Gadhā, which in Garbe's<ref name=fx2_ve2_1962> Edition of Āpastamba, 3, 356.</ref> opinion means ‘roof.’

अरणी
<u>'''Araṇī'''</u> is the designation, in the Rigveda<ref name=fx1_ve2_1963> i. 127, 4;<br> 129, 5;<br> iii. 29, 2;<br> v. 9, 3;<br> vii. 1, 1;<br> x. 184, 3.</ref> and later,<ref name=fx2_ve2_1963> Av. x. 8, 20;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 1, 1, 11;<br> iv. 6, 8, 3;<br> xii. 4, 3, 3. 10;<br> Kaṭha [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], iv. 7;<br> Śvetāśvatara [[उपनिषद्|Upaniṣad]], i. 14. 15;<br> Āśvalāyana [[गृह्य|Gṛhya]] [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 6.</ref> of the two pieces of wood used in producing the sacrificial fire by friction. The upper (''uttarā'') and the lower (''adharā'') are distinguished.<ref name=fx3_ve2_1963> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 1, 22;<br> xi. 5, 1, 15;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], v. 1, 30, etc.</ref> The upper, in the form of a drill, is made of the hard wood of the '''[[अश्वत्थ|Aśvattha]],'''<ref name=fx4_ve2_1963> Av. vi. 11, 1;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], xi. 5, 1, 13;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], iv. 7, 22.</ref> the lower, in the form of a slab, of the soft wood of the '''[[शमी|Śamī]].'''<ref name=fx5_ve2_1963> Av. vi. 11, 1;<br> 30, 2. 3;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 3, 11 ''et seq.''</ref> The drill is twirled forcibly (''sahasā'')<ref name=fx6_ve2_1963> Rv. vi. 48, 5.</ref> backwards and forwards with the arms (''bāhubhyām'')<ref name=fx7_ve2_1963> [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], iii. 4, 7. ''Cf.'' Rv. x. 7, 5.</ref> by means of cords (''raśanābhiḥ'').<ref name=fx8_ve2_1963> ''Cf.'' Rv. x. 4, 6. See Macdonell, ''Vedic Mythology,'' p. 91.</ref> The action doubtless resembled that by which butter is separated from milk in India  at the present day, the same verb (''math,'' ‘twirl,’ ‘churn’)<ref name=fx9_ve2_1963> Fire: Rv. vi. 15, 17;<br> 48, 5, etc. Butter: ''dugdhaṃ mathitam ājyaṃ bhavati,'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 10, 2;<br> Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], v. 3, 2, 6;<br> Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], v. 8, 18.</ref> being used for both processes. This method of producing the sacrificial fire still survives in India. Specimens of the modern apparatus may be seen in the Indian Institute and in the PittRivers Museum at Oxford.

अरत्नि
<u>'''Aratni,'''</u> ‘cubit.’ According to the Śulvasūtra of [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]],<ref name=fx1_ve2_1964> Fleet, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1912, 231, n. 2.</ref> this measure is equal to 24 Aṅgulas or ‘finger-breadths.’ The Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx2_ve2_1964> x. 2, 1, 3.</ref> also mentions 24 Aṅgulis or ‘fingerbreadths’ as a measure, but without reference to the [[अरत्नि|Aratni]].<ref name=fx3_ve2_1964> ''Cf.'' Eggeling, ''Sacred Books of the East,'' 43, 300, n. 3.</ref>

अर्क
<u>'''Arka'''</u> (''Calotropis gigantea'') is often referred to in the Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ix. 1, 1, 4. 9; its leaf: ''arka-[[पर्ण|parṇa]],'' 42; ''arkapalāśa,'' i. 2, 3, 12. 13).<br>==Foot Notes==

आधान
<u>'''Ādhāna'''</u> denotes ‘bridle,’ and especially the ‘bit’ of the bridle in the [[यजुर्वेद|Yajurveda]] Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_1966> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 5, 9, 2. 3;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxviii. 9;<br> Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā, iv. 7, 4;<br> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 3, 10.</ref>

इतिहास
<u>'''Itihāsa.'''</u>--The question of the nature of the Vedic [[इतिहास|Itihāsa]] has been further considered by Keith, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1911, 979-995; 1912, 429-438; and by Oldenberg, ''Nachrichten der ko7niglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Go7ttingen,'' 1911, 441-468.<br>==Foot Notes==

ऐक्ष्वाक
<u>'''Aikṣvāka.'''</u> For ‘Vārṣṇi’ read ‘Vārṣṇa.’<br>==Foot Notes==

कक्ष
<u>'''Kakṣa,'''</u> 1, 131, should be 2. '''[[कंस|Kaṃsa]],''' coming before '''[[ककर|Kakara]],''' 1, 130, and after '''[[कंस|Kaṃsa]],''' ‘pot or vessel of metal,’ which should be 1. '''[[कंस|Kaṃsa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कम्बोज
<u>'''Kamboja.'''</u>--For these Iranian connexions, see Kuhn, ''Avesta, Pehlvi and Ancient Persian Studies in Honour of the late Shamsul-ulema Dastur Peshotanji Behramji Sanjana'' (Strassburg und Leipzig, 1904), 213 ''et seq.;'' Grierson, ''Journal of the Royal  Asiatic Society,'' 1911, 801, 802; 1912, 255; G. K. Nariman, ''ibid,'' 255-257; Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 2^2, 355, 356.<br>==Foot Notes==

काण्डा-विष
<u>'''Kāṇḍā-viṣa,'''</u> 1, 148, should be '''Kāndā-[[विष|viṣa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

काण्वी-पुत्र
<u>'''Kāṇvī-putra,'''</u> 1, 147, should come after '''[[काण्वायन|Kāṇvāyana]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कुमार-हारित
<u>'''Kumāra-hārita,'''</u> 1, 172, should come after '''[[कुभ्र|Kubhra]],''' 1, 162.<br>==Foot Notes==

कुमल बर्हिस्
<u>'''Kumala barhis,'''</u> 1, 172, should be '''[[कुल्मल|Kulmala]]-[[बर्हिस्|barhis]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

कुषुम्भक
<u>'''Kuṣumbhaka,'''</u> according to Egerton (''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 31, 134), denotes ‘poison-bag’ in both passages of the Rigveda.<br>==Foot Notes==

कृष्णल
<u>'''Kṛṣṇala,'''</u> line 1 and note^4, read ‘seed’ for ‘berry.’<br>==Foot Notes==

क्रैव्य
<u>'''Kraivya.'''</u>--For ‘on the '''[[परिवक्रा|Parivakrā]]'''’ read ‘at '''[[परिवक्रा|Parivakrā]].'''’<br>==Foot Notes==

क्रोश
<u>'''Krośa.'''</u>--In note<ref name=fx1_ve2_1978> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 62, 459-470.</ref> for ‘about two miles’ read ‘1(1/8) miles.’ See Fleet, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 1912, 237.

ग्राम
<u>'''Grāma.'''</u>--The phrase Grāmin, ‘possessing a village,’ occurs often in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (ii. 1, 3, 2; 6, 7; 2, 8, 1; 11, 1; 3, 3, 5; 9, 2), usually in connexion with various rites for acquiring a village. Since in these cases repeated mention is made of obtaining pre-eminence over '''Sajātas''' and Samānas, ‘equals,’ it is probable that allowance must also be made for the control over his fellow-villagers which an ambitious man could obtain (''e.g.,'' by loans), and which might end by giving him the position of a great landlord, even without the intervention of the king.<br>==Foot Notes==

चण्डातक
<u>'''Caṇḍātaka'''</u> in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (v. 2, 1, 8) and the Kātyāyana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]] (xiv. 5, 3) denotes an undergarment worn by women.<br>==Foot Notes==

चमू
<u>'''Camū.'''</u>--Oldenberg<ref name=fx1_ve2_1981> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 62, 459-470.</ref> considers that even in the dual the word denotes two vessels into which the Soma, often mixed with water in the '''[[कोश|Kośa]]''' and purified with the sieve, was poured, and that, in the plural, reference is made to these and other vessels into which the Soma was put at the various stages of the  process. '''[[कलश|Kalaśa]]''' similarly denoted either one (sing.) or several (plur.) of the vessels, the dual not being used, since the dual of '''[[चमू|Camū]]''' was reserved for the two vessels ''par excellence.'' In the later ritual the Camūs are replaced by the [[द्रोण|Droṇa]]-[[कलश|Kalaśa]] and the Pūtabhṛt, which was, however, assimilated in form and material (being made of clay, not of wood) to the Ādhāvanīya, the later name of the [[कोश|Kośa]]. The main difficulty of this theory is that it is hard to explain why [[कलश|Kalaśa]] never occurs in the dual. Geldner<ref name=fx2_ve2_1981> ''[[ऋग्वेद|Ṛgveda]], Glossar,'' 60.</ref> falls back on the older view that in [[चमू|Camū]] (dual) the two boards of the Soma press are meant.

चाण्डाल
<u>'''Cāṇḍāla,'''</u> 1, 258, should come after '''[[चाक्षुष|Cākṣuṣa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

जाबाल
<u>'''Jābāla.'''</u>--For ‘descendant of '''Jabāla'''’ read ‘descendant of '''[[जबाला|Jabālā]].'''’<br>==Foot Notes==

तलव
<u>'''Talava,'''</u> 1, 302, should come after '''[[तर्य|Tarya]],''' 1, 301.<br>==Foot Notes==

दृषद्वती
<u>'''Dṛṣadvatī.'''</u>--The identification of this river with the Ghaggar (Macdonell, ''History of Sanskrit Literature,'' 142) seems to be wrong. It is almost certainly the modern Chitang (which is the correct spelling according to Raverty, ''Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,'' 61, 422), or Chitrung (Oldham, ''Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,'' 25, 58; ''cf.'' the sketch map opposite p. 49). See '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]],''' 2, 435, note^4.<br>==Foot Notes==

देवभाग
<u>'''Devabhāga,'''</u> is also mentioned in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (vi. 6, 2, 2) as having ruined the '''Sṛñjayas''' by an error in the sacrifice, and as a contemporary of '''[[वासिष्ठ|Vāsiṣṭha]] Sātahavya.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

नक्षत्र
<u>'''Nakṣatra.'''</u>--In note ^137, 1, 424, supply ‘of’ before ‘the criticisms made,’ and in the following lines read ‘''Journal''’ and ‘466.’<br>==Foot Notes==

निषाद
<u>'''Niṣāda.'''</u>--The Niṣādas, according to the Mahābhārata (iii. 10 538), are situated beyond '''[[विनशन|Vinaśana]],''' the ‘place of disappear ance’ of the '''[[सरस्वती|Sarasvatī]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

नृमेध
<u>'''Nṛmedha.'''</u>--For '''Sumedhas''' read '''[[सुमेध|Sumedha]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

पति
<u>'''Pati,'''</u> 1, 489, note 145, line 7, after ‘ritual’ delete ‘of.’<br>==Foot Notes==

परावृज्
<u>'''Parāvṛj,'''</u> 1, 493, headline, for ‘49,’ read ‘493.’ <br>==Foot Notes==

पष्ठवाह्
<u>'''Paṣṭhavāh'''</u> in the later literature appears sometimes as Praṣṭhavāḥ: if Bloomfield's view<ref name=fx1_ve2_1992> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 29, 78 ''et seq.''</ref> that '''[[प्रष्टि|Praṣṭi]]''' is from ''pra'' and ''as,'' ‘be,’ is correct, this may be the older form. Against this, however, is to be set the constant earlier tradition.<ref name=fx2_ve2_1992> Wackernagel, ''Altindische Grammatik,'' 1, 235.</ref> Macdonell<ref name=fx3_ve2_1992> ''Vedic Grammar,'' p. 48.</ref> connects the word with ''pṛṣṭhavāh,'' ‘carrying on the back.’

प्रतिष्ठा
<u>'''Pratiṣṭhā.'''</u>--For the succour of a fugitive offender may be compared the phrase in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (vi. 5, 6, 3; 8, 4. 5), ‘men do not deliver up even one deserving death (''vadhya'') who has come to them for protection (''prapanna'').’ ''Cf.'' '''[[परिदा|Paridā]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

प्रवर्त
<u>'''Pravarta.'''</u>--The sense of ‘ear-ornament’ is justified by Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xix. 23, 11; 24, 10. ''Cf.'' Baudhāvana Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xiii. 31.<br>==Foot Notes==

प्रष्टि
<u>'''Praṣṭi'''</u> is considered by Bloomfield<ref name=fx1_ve2_1995> ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 29, 78 ''et seq.''</ref> to refer to a horse yoked in front to guide the team, a sense clearly occurring in some places, and to be derived from ''pra'' and ''as,'' ‘be,’ as in '''[[उपस्ति|Upasti]].''' The word is usually<ref name=fx2_ve2_1995> Wackernagel, ''Altindische Grammatik,'' 1, 230, 235;<br> Macdonell, ''Vedic Grammer,'' p. 43.</ref> considered to be connected with ''[[पर्शु|parśu]],'' ‘rib.’

बल्बूथ
<u>'''Balbūtha,'''</u> 2, 64, should come after '''[[बल्बज|Balbaja]],''' 2, 63.<br>==Foot Notes==

बाहीक
<u>'''Bāhīka.'''</u>--For the later traditions, see Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 2^2, 482 ''et seq.;'' Grierson, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 66, 68, 73.<br>==Foot Notes==

ब्रह्मचर्य
<u>'''Brahmacarya.'''</u>--The later rules are exhaustively given by O{??}aser, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 66, 1 ''et seq.''<br>==Foot Notes==

भङ्ग-श्रवस्
<u>'''Bhaṅga-śravas'''</u> is the form of a man's name found in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā (xxxviii. 12) in the parallel to the passage of the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Āraṇyaka (vi. 5, 2), which has '''[[भङ्ग्यश्रवस्|Bhaṅgyaśravas]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

भिषज्
<u>'''Bhiṣaj,'''</u> 2, 104, should be 1. '''[[भिषज्|Bhiṣaj]].''' <br>==Foot Notes==

मत्य
<u>'''Matya,'''</u> ‘harrow’ or ‘roller,’ is found in the [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] portions of the Saṃhitās.<ref name=fx1_ve2_2001> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, vi. 6, 7, 4;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, xxix. 4;<br> [[पञ्चविंश ब्राह्मण|Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa]], ii. 9, 2. ''Cf. [[सुमतित्सरु|sumatitsaru]]'' above, i. 334.</ref> Sāyaṇa<ref name=fx2_ve2_2001> On [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ''loc. cit.''</ref> takes it as ‘manure.’

माय
<u>'''Māya,'''</u> 2, 155, should be '''Māyā.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

मास
<u>'''Māsa,'''</u> 2, 157, note ^10, add: according to [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Samhitā, iii. 5, 1, 3, the new moon begins the month.<br>==Foot Notes==

युग
<u>'''Yuga.'''</u>--Tilak<ref name=fx1_ve2_2004> ''The Arctic Home in the Vedas,'' 172187. ''Cf.'' Bloomfield, ''Journal of the American Oriental Society,'' 30, 60.</ref> has pressed this word into his theory of the reminiscence in the Vedas of an arctic home. He finds in it the sense of ‘month,’ interpreting the legend of '''[[दीर्घतमस्|Dīrghatamas]]''' (= the sun) as an allusion to the arctic summer of ten months, followed by a night of two, traces of which he thinks exist in the notices of the seasons. This theory is, however, most improbable, as is his explanation<ref name=fx2_ve2_2004> ''Op. cit.,'' 455.</ref> of the [[ऐतरेय|Aitareya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx3_ve2_2004> vii. 15.</ref> reference by the theory that it portrays the various stages of the life of the Āryans.

योजन
<u>'''Yojana.'''</u>--From the attribution of thirty Yojanas to the dawn in the Rigveda,<ref name=fx1_ve2_2005> i. 123, 8. ''Cf.'' vi. 59, 6, and the thirty dawns of [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, iv. 3, 11, 1.</ref> Tilak<ref name=fx2_ve2_2005> ''The Arctic Home in the Vedas,'' 103107.</ref> has argued that the dawns of the arctic regions in the interglacial period must be meant. But the reference is apparently to the thirty dawns of the thirty days which constitute the Vedic month. See '''[[मास|Māsa]].'''

रक्षस्
<u>'''Rakṣas'''</u> in the early Vedic literature normally refers to demons, and is only metaphorically<ref name=fx1_ve2_2006> Rv. iii. 30, 15-17;<br> vii. 104, 1. 2;<br> Muir, ''Sanskrit Texts,'' 2^2, 389 ''et seq.''</ref> applied to human foes. No definite tribe is meant.<ref name=fx2_ve2_2006> ''Cf.'' Grierson, ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 66, 68. Similarly '''Piśācas''' are not a tribe in Vedic literature, whatever they may be later.</ref>

राजसूय
<u>'''Rājasūya.'''</u>--Read ‘victor’ for ‘victim’ in line 12.<br>==Foot Notes==

लह्यायन
<u>'''Lahyāyana,'''</u> 2, 232, should be '''Lāhyāyani,''' and the reference, iii. 3, 1, 2. <br>==Foot Notes==

वर्षा-हू
<u>'''1. Varṣā-hū,'''</u> ‘frog’ (‘calling in the rains’), is one of the victims at the [[अश्वमेध|Aśvamedha]] (‘horse sacrifice’) in the Vājasaneyi Saṃhitā (xxiv. 38).<br>==Foot Notes==

वर्षा-हू
<u>'''2. Varṣā-hū'''</u> (‘produced in the rains’) is the name<ref name=fx1_ve2_2010> The form seems to show ''h'' for ''bh,'' as in other cases given by Wackernagel, ''Altindische Grammatik,'' 1, 217^b;<br> ''varṣābhū'' actually occurs in the same sense in post-Vedic Sanskrit.</ref> of a plant (''Boerhavia procumbens'') in the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (iii. 4, 10, 3).

वशा
<u>'''Vaśā'''</u> is frequently qualified by ''anūbandhyā''<ref name=fx1_ve2_2011> ''E.g.,'' [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā, ii. 2, 9, 7;<br> [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā, x. 1.</ref> (‘to be bound for slaughtering’); the economy of killing a barren cow probably tended to produce the sense of ‘barren’ in the word.

वाच्
<u>'''Vāc.'''</u>--Grierson, in his discussion<ref name=fx1_ve2_2012> ''Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,'' 66, 66, n. 1.</ref> of the Paiśācī speech, holds that the passage cited as the speech of the Asuras in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], ''he 'lavo (= he 'rayaḥ),''<ref name=fx2_ve2_2012> ''Op. cit.,'' 64, 104 ''et seq.''</ref> can be regarded as in Paiśācī just as much as in Māgadhī, since the change of ''r'' to ''l,'' and of ''y'' to ''v,'' is found in Paiśācī also. Sten Konow,<ref name=fx2_ve2_2012/> however, considers that Paiśācī was the speech used in the Vindhya region. It would be unwise, as a matter of fact, to lay stress on the phrase ''he 'lavo,'' because both the reading and the sense are by no means certain.<ref name=fx3_ve2_2012> It should be noted that the phrase cannot be genuine Prākrit as it stands, for that would not give us ''he 'lavo he 'lavaḥ.''</ref> But it should be noted that the easterners and the Asuras are elsewhere in the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]]<ref name=fx4_ve2_2012> xiii. 8, 1, 5. Probably the view of the earlier part of the Śatapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (iii. 2, 1, 23) would be the same, since its reputed author, '''[[याज्ञवल्क्य|Yājñavalkya]]''' is connected in tradition with the East. Dr. Grierson's argument would have been stronger had the reference occurred in one of the '''[[शाण्डिल्य|Śāṇḍilya]]''' books</ref> connected: this tells against Dr. Grierson's view.

वातावत
<u>'''Vātāvata'''</u> and '''Vātāvant,''' 2, 284, should be read for '''[[वातवत|Vātavata]]''' and '''[[वातवन्त्|Vātavant]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

वासस्
<u>'''Vāsas.'''</u>--In the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] Saṃhitā (ii. 2, 11, 4) ''upādhāyyapūrvaya,'' as an epithet of [[वासस्|Vāsas]], appears to denote ‘fringed (''citrānta'') according to Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xix. 20, 2.<br>==Foot Notes==

विषाणका
<u>'''Viṣāṇakā,'''</u> 2, 313, headline, for ‘31,’ read ‘313.’ <br>==Foot Notes==

वेहत्
<u>'''Vehat'''</u> occurs in conjunction with '''[[वशा|Vaśā]]''' in the [[काठक|Kāṭhaka]] Saṃhitā (xxxviii. 10), the Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā (iii. 11, 11), the Vājasaneyī Saṃhitā (xxi. 21), and the [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]] (ii. 6, 18, 4).<br>==Foot Notes==

वैरिण
<u>'''Vairiṇa,'''</u> 2, 318, should be '''[[वीरण|Vīraṇa]].'''<br>==Foot Notes==

व्यत्
<u>'''Vyat,'''</u> 1, 523, should be Vyant.<br>==Foot Notes==

शम्या
<u>'''Śamyā'''</u> in the Brāhmaṇas<ref name=fx1_ve2_2019> [[तैत्तिरीय|Taittirīya]] [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 6, 1, 1;<br> Satapatha [[ब्राह्मण|Brāhmaṇa]], i. 1, 1, 22;<br> 2, 1, 16;<br> v. 2, 3, 2;<br> [[बौधायन|Baudhāyana]] Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], i. 7;<br> Āpastamba Śrauta [[सूत्र|Sūtra]], xviii. 8, 12, etc.</ref> frequently denotes the wooden support on which the lower of the two millstones ('''[[दृषद्|Dṛṣad]]''') is placed.

स्यामैअजयन्त
<u>'''Syāmaiajayanta,'''</u> 1, 185, should be '''Śyāmasujayanta.'''<br>==Foot Notes==

श्रुष्टि
<u>'''Śruṣṭi'''</u> (more correctly '''Śnuṣṭi''') '''Aṅgirasa,''' 2, 397, should come on p. 403, before '''[[श्रुष्टिगु|Śruṣṭigu]]; and [[सुकुरीर|Sukurīra]]''' before '''Sukeśin,''' 2, 453.<br>==Foot Notes==

संवत्सर
<u>'''Saṃvatsara.'''</u>--Tilak<ref name=fx1_ve2_2022> ''The Arctic Home in the Vedas,'' 280288.</ref> argues that the Rigveda<ref name=fx2_ve2_2022> ii. 12, 11 (''catvāriṃśyāṃ śaradi'').</ref> and the Atharvaveda<ref name=fx3_ve2_2022> xii. 3, 34 (''ṣaṣṭyāṃ śaratsu;<br>'' the plural, Tilak thinks, denotes, every year’).</ref> contain signs of a dating by season and day, but neither of the passages adduced by him is at all probably so taken.

सायकायन
<u>'''Sāyakāyana,'''</u> 1, 155, '''[[सोभरि|Sobhari]],''' 1, 261, '''[[सौकरायण|Saukarāyaṇa]],''' 1, 155, should be read for [[सायकायन|Sāyakāyana]], [[सोभरि|Sobhari]], and [[सौकरायण|Saukarāyaṇa]] respectively.<br><br>Several misprints are due to the loss of diacritical marks: thus for Ajya read [[आज्य|Ājya]], 2, 20; for Arcatka, Ārcatka, 2, 357; for Artava, [[आर्तव|Ārtava]], 1, 63; for Apayā, [[आपया|Āpayā]], 1, 218; for Amikṣā, [[आमिक्षा|Āmikṣā]], 1, 250; for Aśuṃga, [[आशुंग|Āśuṃga]], 2, 387; for Asandī, [[आसन्दी|Āsandī]], 2, 383; for Dirghatamas, [[दीर्घतमस्|Dīrghatamas]], 1, 366; for Satapatha, Śatapatha, 1, 18, 34, 55, 67, 111, 119, 157, 242, 291, 371, 463, 516, 523; 2, 24, 80, 220, 221, 358, 362, 433; for Srauta, Śrauta, 1, 18, 55, 281, 282, 373; 2, 34, 71, 281, 301; for Sāṅkhāyana, [[शाङ्खायन|Śāṅkhāyana]], 1, 257, 281, 400, 469; 2, 34, 87, 281, 383; for Sāṭyāyanaka, Śātyāyanaka, i. 407; for [[सावसायन|Sāvasāyana]], Śāvasāyana, 2, 376. <br>==Foot Notes==

